Hagarenes;

83:7 Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalek; the Philistines with the
inhabitants of Tyre;

83:8 Assur also is joined with them: they have holpen the children of
Lot.

Selah.

83:9 Do unto them as unto the Midianites; as to Sisera, as to Jabin,
at the brook of Kison:

83:10 Which perished at Endor: they became as dung for the earth.

83:11 Make their nobles like Oreb, and like Zeeb: yea, all their
princes as Zebah, and as Zalmunna:

83:12 Who said, Let us take to ourselves the houses of God in
possession.

83:13 O my God, make them like a wheel; as the stubble before the
wind.

83:14 As the fire burneth a wood, and as the flame setteth the
mountains on fire;

83:15 So persecute them with thy tempest, and make them afraid with
thy storm.

83:16 Fill their faces with shame; that they may seek thy name, O
LORD.

83:17 Let them be confounded and troubled for ever; yea, let them be
put to shame, and perish:

83:18 That men may know that thou, whose name alone is JEHOVAH, art
the most high over all the earth.



84:1 How amiable are thy tabernacles, O LORD of hosts!

84:2 My soul longeth, yea, even fainteth for the courts of the LORD:
my heart and my flesh crieth out for the living God.

84:3 Yea, the sparrow hath found an house, and the swallow a nest for
herself, where she may lay her young, even thine altars, O LORD of
hosts, my King, and my God.

84:4 Blessed are they that dwell in thy house: they will be still
praising thee. Selah.

84:5 Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee; in whose heart are
the ways of them.

84:6 Who passing through the valley of Baca make it a well; the rain
also filleth the pools.

84:7 They go from strength to strength, every one of them in Zion
appeareth before God.

84:8 O LORD God of hosts, hear my prayer: give ear, O God of Jacob.
Selah.

84:9 Behold, O God our shield, and look upon the face of thine
anointed.

84:10 For a day in thy courts is better than a thousand. I had rather
be a doorkeeper in the house of my God, than to dwell in the tents of
wickedness.

84:11 For the LORD God is a sun and shield: the LORD will give grace
and glory: no good thing will he withhold from them that walk
uprightly.

84:12 O LORD of hosts, blessed is the man that trusteth in thee.



85:1 Lord, thou hast been favourable unto thy land: thou hast brought
back the captivity of Jacob.

85:2 Thou hast forgiven the iniquity of thy people, thou hast covered
all their sin. Selah.

85:3 Thou hast taken away all thy wrath: thou hast turned thyself from
the fierceness of thine anger.

85:4 Turn us, O God of our salvation, and cause thine anger toward us
to cease.

85:5 Wilt thou be angry with us for ever? wilt thou draw out thine
anger to all generations?

85:6 Wilt thou not revive us again: that thy people may rejoice in
thee?

85:7 Shew us thy mercy, O LORD, and grant us thy salvation.

85:8 I will hear what God the LORD will speak: for he will speak peace
unto his people, and to his saints: but let them not turn again to
folly.

85:9 Surely his salvation is nigh them that fear him; that glory may
dwell in our land.

85:10 Mercy and truth are met together; righteousness and peace have
kissed each other.

85:11 Truth shall spring out of the earth; and righteousness shall
look down from heaven.

85:12 Yea, the LORD shall give that which is good; and our land shall
yield her increase.

85:13 Righteousness shall go before him; and shall set us in the way
of his steps.



86:1 Bow down thine ear, O LORD, hear me: for I am poor and needy.

86:2 Preserve my soul; for I am holy: O thou my God, save thy servant
that trusteth in thee.

86:3 Be merciful unto me, O Lord: for I cry unto thee daily.

86:4 Rejoice the soul of thy servant: for unto thee, O Lord, do I lift
up my soul.

86:5 For thou, Lord, art good, and ready to forgive; and plenteous in
mercy unto all them that call upon thee.

86:6 Give ear, O LORD, unto my prayer; and attend to the voice of my
supplications.

86:7 In the day of my trouble I will call upon thee: for thou wilt
answer me.

86:8 Among the gods there is none like unto thee, O Lord; neither are
there any works like unto thy works.

86:9 All nations whom thou hast made shall come and worship before
thee, O Lord; and shall glorify thy name.

86:10 For thou art great, and doest wondrous things: thou art God
alone.

86:11 Teach me thy way, O LORD; I will walk in thy truth: unite my
heart to fear thy name.

86:12 I will praise thee, O Lord my God, with all my heart: and I will
glorify thy name for evermore.

86:13 For great is thy mercy toward me: and thou hast delivered my
soul from the lowest hell.

86:14 O God, the proud are risen against me, and the assemblies of
violent men have sought after my soul; and have not set thee before
them.

86:15 But thou, O Lord, art a God full of compassion, and gracious,
long suffering, and plenteous in mercy and truth.

86:16 O turn unto me, and have mercy upon me; give thy strength unto
thy servant, and save the son of thine handmaid.

86:17 Shew me a token for good; that they which hate me may see it,
and be ashamed: because thou, LORD, hast holpen me, and comforted me.



87:1 His foundation is in the holy mountains.

87:2 The LORD loveth the gates of Zion more than all the dwellings of
Jacob.

87:3 Glorious things are spoken of thee, O city of God. Selah.

87:4 I will make mention of Rahab and Babylon to them that know me:
behold Philistia, and Tyre, with Ethiopia; this man was born there.

87:5 And of Zion it shall be said, This and that man was born in her:
and the highest himself shall establish her.

87:6 The LORD shall count, when he writeth up the people, that this
man was born there. Selah.

87:7 As well the singers as the players on instruments shall be there:
all my springs are in thee.



88:1 O lord God of my salvation, I have cried day and night before
thee:

88:2 Let my prayer come before thee: incline thine ear unto my cry;

88:3 For my soul is full of troubles: and my life draweth nigh unto
the grave.

88:4 I am counted with them that go down into the pit: I am as a man
that hath no strength:

88:5 Free among the dead, like the slain that lie in the grave, whom
thou rememberest no more: and they are cut off from thy hand.

88:6 Thou hast laid me in the lowest pit, in darkness, in the deeps.

88:7 Thy wrath lieth hard upon me, and thou hast afflicted me with all
thy waves. Selah.

88:8 Thou hast put away mine acquaintance far from me; thou hast made
me an abomination unto them: I am shut up, and I cannot come forth.

88:9 Mine eye mourneth by reason of affliction: LORD, I have called
daily upon thee, I have stretched out my hands unto thee.

88:10 Wilt thou shew wonders to the dead? shall the dead arise and
praise thee? Selah.

88:11 Shall thy lovingkindness be declared in the grave? or thy
faithfulness in destruction?

88:12 Shall thy wonders be known in the dark? and thy righteousness in
the land of forgetfulness?

88:13 But unto thee have I cried, O LORD; and in the morning shall my
prayer prevent thee.

88:14 LORD, why castest thou off my soul? why hidest thou thy face
from me?

88:15 I am afflicted and ready to die from my youth up: while I suffer
thy terrors I am distracted.

88:16 Thy fierce wrath goeth over me; thy terrors have cut me off.

88:17 They came round about me daily like water; they compassed me
about together.

88:18 Lover and friend hast thou put far from me, and mine
acquaintance into darkness.



89:1 I will sing of the mercies of the LORD for ever: with my mouth
will I make known thy faithfulness to all generations.

89:2 For I have said, Mercy shall be built up for ever: thy
faithfulness shalt thou establish in the very heavens.

89:3 I have made a covenant with my chosen, I have sworn unto David my
servant,

89:4 Thy seed will I establish for ever, and build up thy throne to
all generations. Selah.

89:5 And the heavens shall praise thy wonders, O LORD: thy
faithfulness also in the congregation of the saints.

89:6 For who in the heaven can be compared unto the LORD? who among
the sons of the mighty can be likened unto the LORD?

89:7 God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the saints, and to
be had in reverence of all them that are about him.

89:8 O LORD God of hosts, who is a strong LORD like unto thee? or to
thy faithfulness round about thee?

89:9 Thou rulest the raging of the sea: when the waves thereof arise,
thou stillest them.

89:10 Thou hast broken Rahab in pieces, as one that is slain; thou
hast scattered thine enemies with thy strong arm.

89:11 The heavens are thine, the earth also is thine: as for the world
and the fulness thereof, thou hast founded them.

89:12 The north and the south thou hast created them: Tabor and Hermon
shall rejoice in thy name.

89:13 Thou hast a mighty arm: strong is thy hand, and high is thy
right hand.

89:14 Justice and judgment are the habitation of thy throne: mercy and
truth shall go before thy face.

89:15 Blessed is the people that know the joyful sound: they shall
walk, O LORD, in the light of thy countenance.

89:16 In thy name shall they rejoice all the day: and in thy
righteousness shall they be exalted.

89:17 For thou art the glory of their strength: and in thy favour our
horn shall be exalted.

89:18 For the LORD is our defence; and the Holy One of Israel is our
king.

89:19 Then thou spakest in vision to thy holy one, and saidst, I have
laid help upon one that is mighty; I have exalted one chosen out of
the people.

89:20 I have found David my servant; with my holy oil have I anointed
him:

89:21 With whom my hand shall be established: mine arm also shall
strengthen him.

89:22 The enemy shall not exact upon him; nor the son of wickedness
afflict him.

89:23 And I will beat down his foes before his face, and plague them
that hate him.

89:24 But my faithfulness and my mercy shall be with him: and in my
name shall his horn be exalted.

89:25 I will set his hand also in the sea, and his right hand in the
rivers.

89:26 He shall cry unto me, Thou art my father, my God, and the rock
of my salvation.

89:27 Also I will make him my firstborn, higher than the kings of the
earth.

89:28 My mercy will I keep for him for evermore, and my covenant shall
stand fast with him.

89:29 His seed also will I make to endure for ever, and his throne as
the days of heaven.

89:30 If his children forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments;

89:31 If they break my statutes, and keep not my commandments;

89:32 Then will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their
iniquity with stripes.

89:33 Nevertheless my lovingkindness will I not utterly take from him,
nor suffer my faithfulness to fail.

89:34 My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone
out of my lips.

89:35 Once have I sworn by my holiness that I will not lie unto David.

89:36 His seed shall endure for ever, and his throne as the sun before
me.

89:37 It shall be established for ever as the moon, and as a faithful
witness in heaven. Selah.

89:38 But thou hast cast off and abhorred, thou hast been wroth with
thine anointed.

89:39 Thou hast made void the covenant of thy servant: thou hast
profaned his crown by casting it to the ground.

89:40 Thou hast broken down all his hedges; thou hast brought his
strong holds to ruin.

89:41 All that pass by the way spoil him: he is a reproach to his
neighbours.

89:42 Thou hast set up the right hand of his adversaries; thou hast
made all his enemies to rejoice.

89:43 Thou hast also turned the edge of his sword, and hast not made
him to stand in the battle.

89:44 Thou hast made his glory to cease, and cast his throne down to
the ground.

89:45 The days of his youth hast thou shortened: thou hast covered him
with shame. Selah.

89:46 How long, LORD? wilt thou hide thyself for ever? shall thy wrath
burn like fire?

89:47 Remember how short my time is: wherefore hast thou made all men
in vain?

89:48 What man is he that liveth, and shall not see death? shall he
deliver his soul from the hand of the grave? Selah.

89:49 Lord, where are thy former lovingkindnesses, which thou swarest
unto David in thy truth?

89:50 Remember, Lord, the reproach of thy servants; how I do bear in
my bosom the reproach of all the mighty people;

89:51 Wherewith thine enemies have reproached, O LORD; wherewith they
have reproached the footsteps of thine anointed.

89:52 Blessed be the LORD for evermore. Amen, and Amen.



90:1 Lord, thou hast been our dwelling place in all generations.

90:2 Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever thou hadst
formed the earth and the world, even from everlasting to everlasting,
thou art God.

90:3 Thou turnest man to destruction; and sayest, Return, ye children
of men.

90:4 For a thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday when it is
past, and as a watch in the night.

90:5 Thou carriest them away as with a flood; they are as a sleep: in
the morning they are like grass which groweth up.

90:6 In the morning it flourisheth, and groweth up; in the evening it
is cut down, and withereth.

90:7 For we are consumed by thine anger, and by thy wrath are we
troubled.

90:8 Thou hast set our iniquities before thee, our secret sins in the
light of thy countenance.

90:9 For all our days are passed away in thy wrath: we spend our years
as a tale that is told.

90:10 The days of our years are threescore years and ten; and if by
reason of strength they be fourscore years, yet is their strength
labour and sorrow; for it is soon cut off, and we fly away.

90:11 Who knoweth the power of thine anger? even according to thy
fear, so is thy wrath.

90:12 So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts
unto wisdom.

90:13 Return, O LORD, how long? and let it repent thee concerning thy
servants.

90:14 O satisfy us early with thy mercy; that we may rejoice and be
glad all our days.

90:15 Make us glad according to the days wherein thou hast afflicted
us, and the years wherein we have seen evil.

90:16 Let thy work appear unto thy servants, and thy glory unto their
children.

90:17 And let the beauty of the LORD our God be upon us: and establish
thou the work of our hands upon us; yea, the work of our hands
establish thou it.



91:1 He that dwelleth in the secret place of the most High shall abide
under the shadow of the Almighty.

91:2 I will say of the LORD, He is my refuge and my fortress: my God;
in him will I trust.

91:3 Surely he shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler, and
from the noisome pestilence.

91:4 He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his wings shalt
thou trust: his truth shall be thy shield and buckler.

91:5 Thou shalt not be afraid for the terror by night; nor for the
arrow that flieth by day;

91:6 Nor for the pestilence that walketh in darkness; nor for the
destruction that wasteth at noonday.

91:7 A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right
hand; but it shall not come nigh thee.

91:8 Only with thine eyes shalt thou behold and see the reward of the
wicked.

91:9 Because thou hast made the LORD, which is my refuge, even the
most High, thy habitation;

91:10 There shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any plague come
nigh thy dwelling.

91:11 For he shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee in
all thy ways.

91:12 They shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot
against a stone.

91:13 Thou shalt tread upon the lion and adder: the young lion and the
dragon shalt thou trample under feet.

91:14 Because he hath set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver
him: I will set him on high, because he hath known my name.

91:15 He shall call upon me, and I will answer him: I will be with him
in trouble; I will deliver him, and honour him.

91:16 With long life will I satisfy him, and shew him my salvation.



92:1 It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing
praises unto thy name, O most High:

92:2 To shew forth thy lovingkindness in the morning, and thy
faithfulness every night,

92:3 Upon an instrument of ten strings, and upon the psaltery; upon
the harp with a solemn sound.

92:4 For thou, LORD, hast made me glad through thy work: I will
triumph in the works of thy hands.

92:5 O LORD, how great are thy works! and thy thoughts are very deep.

92:6 A brutish man knoweth not; neither doth a fool understand this.

92:7 When the wicked spring as the grass, and when all the workers of
iniquity do flourish; it is that they shall be destroyed for ever:

92:8 But thou, LORD, art most high for evermore.

92:9 For, lo, thine enemies, O LORD, for, lo, thine enemies shall
perish; all the workers of iniquity shall be scattered.

92:10 But my horn shalt thou exalt like the horn of an unicorn: I
shall be anointed with fresh oil.

92:11 Mine eye also shall see my desire on mine enemies, and mine ears
shall hear my desire of the wicked that rise up against me.

92:12 The righteous shall flourish like the palm tree: he shall grow
like a cedar in Lebanon.

92:13 Those that be planted in the house of the LORD shall flourish in
the courts of our God.

92:14 They shall still bring forth fruit in old age; they shall be fat
and flourishing;

92:15 To shew that the LORD is upright: he is my rock, and there is no
unrighteousness in him.



93:1 The LORD reigneth, he is clothed with majesty; the LORD is
clothed with strength, wherewith he hath girded himself: the world
also is stablished, that it cannot be moved.

93:2 Thy throne is established of old: thou art from everlasting.

93:3 The floods have lifted up, O LORD, the floods have lifted up
their voice; the floods lift up their waves.

93:4 The LORD on high is mightier than the noise of many waters, yea,
than the mighty waves of the sea.

93:5 Thy testimonies are very sure: holiness becometh thine house, O
LORD, for ever.



94:1 O Lord God, to whom vengeance belongeth; O God, to whom vengeance
belongeth, shew thyself.

94:2 Lift up thyself, thou judge of the earth: render a reward to the
proud.

94:3 LORD, how long shall the wicked, how long shall the wicked
triumph?

94:4 How long shall they utter and speak hard things? and all the
workers of iniquity boast themselves?

94:5 They break in pieces thy people, O LORD, and afflict thine
heritage.

94:6 They slay the widow and the stranger, and murder the fatherless.

94:7 Yet they say, The LORD shall not see, neither shall the God of
Jacob regard it.

94:8 Understand, ye brutish among the people: and ye fools, when will
ye be wise?

94:9 He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? he that formed the
eye, shall he not see?

94:10 He that chastiseth the heathen, shall not he correct? he that
teacheth man knowledge, shall not he know?

94:11 The LORD knoweth the thoughts of man, that they are vanity.

94:12 Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O LORD, and teachest
him out of thy law;

94:13 That thou mayest give him rest from the days of adversity, until
the pit be digged for the wicked.

94:14 For the LORD will not cast off his people, neither will he
forsake his inheritance.

94:15 But judgment shall return unto righteousness: and all the
upright in heart shall follow it.

94:16 Who will rise up for me against the evildoers? or who will stand
up for me against the workers of iniquity?

94:17 Unless the LORD had been my help, my soul had almost dwelt in
silence.

94:18 When I said, My foot slippeth; thy mercy, O LORD, held me up.

94:19 In the multitude of my thoughts within me thy comforts delight
my soul.

94:20 Shall the throne of iniquity have fellowship with thee, which
frameth mischief by a law?

94:21 They gather themselves together against the soul of the
righteous, and condemn the innocent blood.

94:22 But the LORD is my defence; and my God is the rock of my refuge.

94:23 And he shall bring upon them their own iniquity, and shall cut
them off in their own wickedness; yea, the LORD our God shall cut them
off.



95:1 O come, let us sing unto the LORD: let us make a joyful noise to
the rock of our salvation.

95:2 Let us come before his presence with thanksgiving, and make a
joyful noise unto him with psalms.

95:3 For the LORD is a great God, and a great King above all gods.

95:4 In his hand are the deep places of the earth: the strength of the
hills is his also.

95:5 The sea is his, and he made it: and his hands formed the dry
land.

95:6 O come, let us worship and bow down: let us kneel before the LORD
our maker.

95:7 For he is our God; and we are the people of his pasture, and the
sheep of his hand. To day if ye will hear his voice,

95:8 Harden not your heart, as in the provocation, and as in the day
of temptation in the wilderness:

95:9 When your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my work.

95:10 Forty years long was I grieved with this generation, and said,
It is a people that do err in their heart, and they have not known my
ways:

95:11 Unto whom I sware in my wrath that they should not enter into my
rest.



96:1 O sing unto the LORD a new song: sing unto the LORD, all the
earth.

96:2 Sing unto the LORD, bless his name; shew forth his salvation from
day to day.

96:3 Declare his glory among the heathen, his wonders among all
people.

96:4 For the LORD is great, and greatly to be praised: he is to be
feared above all gods.

96:5 For all the gods of the nations are idols: but the LORD made the
heavens.

96:6 Honour and majesty are before him: strength and beauty are in his
sanctuary.

96:7 Give unto the LORD, O ye kindreds of the people, give unto the
LORD glory and strength.

96:8 Give unto the LORD the glory due unto his name: bring an
offering, and come into his courts.

96:9 O worship the LORD in the beauty of holiness: fear before him,
all the earth.

96:10 Say among the heathen that the LORD reigneth: the world also
shall be established that it shall not be moved: he shall judge the
people righteously.

96:11 Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad; let the sea
roar, and the fulness thereof.

96:12 Let the field be joyful, and all that is therein: then shall all
the trees of the wood rejoice

96:13 Before the LORD: for he cometh, for he cometh to judge the
earth: he shall judge the world with righteousness, and the people
with his truth.



97:1 The LORD reigneth; let the earth rejoice; let the multitude of
isles be glad thereof.

97:2 Clouds and darkness are round about him: righteousness and
judgment are the habitation of his throne.

97:3 A fire goeth before him, and burneth up his enemies round about.

97:4 His lightnings enlightened the world: the earth saw, and
trembled.

97:5 The hills melted like wax at the presence of the LORD, at the
presence of the Lord of the whole earth.

97:6 The heavens declare his righteousness, and all the people see his
glory.

97:7 Confounded be all they that serve graven images, that boast
themselves of idols: worship him, all ye gods.

97:8 Zion heard, and was glad; and the daughters of Judah rejoiced
because of thy judgments, O LORD.

97:9 For thou, LORD, art high above all the earth: thou art exalted
far above all gods.

97:10 Ye that love the LORD, hate evil: he preserveth the souls of his
saints; he delivereth them out of the hand of the wicked.

97:11 Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in
heart.

97:12 Rejoice in the LORD, ye righteous; and give thanks at the
remembrance of his holiness.



98:1 O sing unto the LORD a new song; for he hath done marvellous
things: his right hand, and his holy arm, hath gotten him the victory.

98:2 The LORD hath made known his salvation: his righteousness hath he
openly shewed in the sight of the heathen.

98:3 He hath remembered his mercy and his truth toward the house of
Israel: all the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God.

98:4 Make a joyful noise unto the LORD, all the earth: make a loud
noise, and rejoice, and sing praise.

98:5 Sing unto the LORD with the harp; with the harp, and the voice of
a psalm.

98:6 With trumpets and sound of cornet make a joyful noise before the
LORD, the King.

98:7 Let the sea roar, and the fulness thereof; the world, and they
that dwell therein.

98:8 Let the floods clap their hands: let the hills be joyful together

98:9 Before the LORD; for he cometh to judge the earth: with
righteousness shall he judge the world, and the people with equity.



99:1 The LORD reigneth; let the people tremble: he sitteth between the
cherubims; let the earth be moved.

99:2 The LORD is great in Zion; and he is high above all the people.

99:3 Let them praise thy great and terrible name; for it is holy.

99:4 The king's strength also loveth judgment; thou dost establish
equity, thou executest judgment and righteousness in Jacob.

99:5 Exalt ye the LORD our God, and worship at his footstool; for he
is holy.

99:6 Moses and Aaron among his priests, and Samuel among them that
call upon his name; they called upon the LORD, and he answered them.

99:7 He spake unto them in the cloudy pillar: they kept his
testimonies, and the ordinance that he gave them.

99:8 Thou answeredst them, O LORD our God: thou wast a God that
forgavest them, though thou tookest vengeance of their inventions.

99:9 Exalt the LORD our God, and worship at his holy hill; for the
LORD our God is holy.



100:1 Make a joyful noise unto the LORD, all ye lands.

100:2 Serve the LORD with gladness: come before his presence with
singing.

100:3 Know ye that the LORD he is God: it is he that hath made us, and
not we ourselves; we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture.

100:4 Enter into his gates with thanksgiving, and into his courts with
praise: be thankful unto him, and bless his name.

100:5 For the LORD is good; his mercy is everlasting; and his truth
endureth to all generations.



101:1 I will sing of mercy and judgment: unto thee, O LORD, will I
sing.

101:2 I will behave myself wisely in a perfect way. O when wilt thou
come unto me? I will walk within my house with a perfect heart.

101:3 I will set no wicked thing before mine eyes: I hate the work of
them that turn aside; it shall not cleave to me.

101:4 A froward heart shall depart from me: I will not know a wicked
person.

101:5 Whoso privily slandereth his neighbour, him will I cut off: him
that hath an high look and a proud heart will not I suffer.

101:6 Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the land, that they may
dwell with me: he that walketh in a perfect way, he shall serve me.

101:7 He that worketh deceit shall not dwell within my house: he that
telleth lies shall not tarry in my sight.

101:8 I will early destroy all the wicked of the land; that I may cut
off all wicked doers from the city of the LORD.



102:1 Hear my prayer, O LORD, and let my cry come unto thee.

102:2 Hide not thy face from me in the day when I am in trouble;
incline thine ear unto me: in the day when I call answer me speedily.

102:3 For my days are consumed like smoke, and my bones are burned as
an hearth.

102:4 My heart is smitten, and withered like grass; so that I forget
to eat my bread.

102:5 By reason of the voice of my groaning my bones cleave to my
skin.

102:6 I am like a pelican of the wilderness: I am like an owl of the
desert.

102:7 I watch, and am as a sparrow alone upon the house top.

102:8 Mine enemies reproach me all the day; and they that are mad
against me are sworn against me.

102:9 For I have eaten ashes like bread, and mingled my drink with
weeping.

102:10 Because of thine indignation and thy wrath: for thou hast
lifted me up, and cast me down.

102:11 My days are like a shadow that declineth; and I am withered
like grass.

102:12 But thou, O LORD, shall endure for ever; and thy remembrance
unto all generations.

102:13 Thou shalt arise, and have mercy upon Zion: for the time to
favour her, yea, the set time, is come.

102:14 For thy servants take pleasure in her stones, and favour the
dust thereof.

102:15 So the heathen shall fear the name of the LORD, and all the
kings of the earth thy glory.

102:16 When the LORD shall build up Zion, he shall appear in his
glory.

102:17 He will regard the prayer of the destitute, and not despise
their prayer.

102:18 This shall be written for the generation to come: and the
people which shall be created shall praise the LORD.

102:19 For he hath looked down from the height of his sanctuary; from
heaven did the LORD behold the earth;

102:20 To hear the groaning of the prisoner; to loose those that are
appointed to death;

102:21 To declare the name of the LORD in Zion, and his praise in
Jerusalem;

102:22 When the people are gathered together, and the kingdoms, to
serve the LORD.

102:23 He weakened my strength in the way; he shortened my days.

102:24 I said, O my God, take me not away in the midst of my days: thy
years are throughout all generations.

102:25 Of old hast thou laid the foundation of the earth: and the
heavens are the work of thy hands.

102:26 They shall perish, but thou shalt endure: yea, all of them
shall wax old like a garment; as a vesture shalt thou change them, and
they shall be changed:

102:27 But thou art the same, and thy years shall have no end.

102:28 The children of thy servants shall continue, and their seed
shall be established before thee.



103:1 Bless the LORD, O my soul: and all that is within me, bless his
holy name.

103:2 Bless the LORD, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits:

103:3 Who forgiveth all thine iniquities; who healeth all thy
diseases;

103:4 Who redeemeth thy life from destruction; who crowneth thee with
lovingkindness and tender mercies;

103:5 Who satisfieth thy mouth with good things; so that thy youth is
renewed like the eagle's.

103:6 The LORD executeth righteousness and judgment for all that are
oppressed.

103:7 He made known his ways unto Moses, his acts unto the children of
Israel.

103:8 The LORD is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and plenteous
in mercy.

103:9 He will not always chide: neither will he keep his anger for
ever.

103:10 He hath not dealt with us after our sins; nor rewarded us
according to our iniquities.

103:11 For as the heaven is high above the earth, so great is his
mercy toward them that fear him.

103:12 As far as the east is from the west, so far hath he removed our
transgressions from us.

103:13 Like as a father pitieth his children, so the LORD pitieth them
that fear him.

103:14 For he knoweth our frame; he remembereth that we are dust.

103:15 As for man, his days are as grass: as a flower of the field, so
he flourisheth.

103:16 For the wind passeth over it, and it is gone; and the place
thereof shall know it no more.

103:17 But the mercy of the LORD is from everlasting to everlasting
upon them that fear him, and his righteousness unto children's
children;

103:18 To such as keep his covenant, and to those that remember his
commandments to do them.

103:19 The LORD hath prepared his throne in the heavens; and his
kingdom ruleth over all.

103:20 Bless the LORD, ye his angels, that excel in strength, that do
his commandments, hearkening unto the voice of his word.

103:21 Bless ye the LORD, all ye his hosts; ye ministers of his, that
do his pleasure.

103:22 Bless the LORD, all his works in all places of his dominion:
bless the LORD, O my soul.



104:1 Bless the LORD, O my soul. O LORD my God, thou art very great;
thou art clothed with honour and majesty.

104:2 Who coverest thyself with light as with a garment: who
stretchest out the heavens like a curtain:

104:3 Who layeth the beams of his chambers in the waters: who maketh
the clouds his chariot: who walketh upon the wings of the wind:

104:4 Who maketh his angels spirits; his ministers a flaming fire:

104:5 Who laid the foundations of the earth, that it should not be
removed for ever.

104:6 Thou coveredst it with the deep as with a garment: the waters
stood above the mountains.

104:7 At thy rebuke they fled; at the voice of thy thunder they hasted
away.

104:8 They go up by the mountains; they go down by the valleys unto
the place which thou hast founded for them.

104:9 Thou hast set a bound that they may not pass over; that they
turn not again to cover the earth.

104:10 He sendeth the springs into the valleys, which run among the
hills.

104:11 They give drink to every beast of the field: the wild asses
quench their thirst.

104:12 By them shall the fowls of the heaven have their habitation,
which sing among the branches.

104:13 He watereth the hills from his chambers: the earth is satisfied
with the fruit of thy works.

104:14 He causeth the grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for the
service of man: that he may bring forth food out of the earth;

104:15 And wine that maketh glad the heart of man, and oil to make his
face to shine, and bread which strengtheneth man's heart.

104:16 The trees of the LORD are full of sap; the cedars of Lebanon,
which he hath planted;

104:17 Where the birds make their nests: as for the stork, the fir
trees are her house.

104:18 The high hills are a refuge for the wild goats; and the rocks
for the conies.

104:19 He appointed the moon for seasons: the sun knoweth his going
down.

104:20 Thou makest darkness, and it is night: wherein all the beasts
of the forest do creep forth.

104:21 The young lions roar after their prey, and seek their meat from
God.

104:22 The sun ariseth, they gather themselves together, and lay them
down in their dens.

104:23 Man goeth forth unto his work and to his labour until the
evening.

104:24 O LORD, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom hast thou made
them all: the earth is full of thy riches.

104:25 So is this great and wide sea, wherein are things creeping
innumerable, both small and great beasts.

104:26 There go the ships: there is that leviathan, whom thou hast
made to play therein.

104:27 These wait all upon thee; that thou mayest give them their meat
in due season.

104:28 That thou givest them they gather: thou openest thine hand,
they are filled with good.

104:29 Thou hidest thy face, they are troubled: thou takest away their
breath, they die, and return to their dust.

104:30 Thou sendest forth thy spirit, they are created: and thou
renewest the face of the earth.

104:31 The glory of the LORD shall endure for ever: the LORD shall
rejoice in his works.

104:32 He looketh on the earth, and it trembleth: he toucheth the
hills, and they smoke.

104:33 I will sing unto the LORD as long as I live: I will sing praise
to my God while I have my being.

104:34 My meditation of him shall be sweet: I will be glad in the
LORD.

104:35 Let the sinners be consumed out of the earth, and let the
wicked be no more. Bless thou the LORD, O my soul. Praise ye the LORD.



105:1 O give thanks unto the LORD; call upon his name: make known his
deeds among the people.

105:2 Sing unto him, sing psalms unto him: talk ye of all his wondrous
works.

105:3 Glory ye in his holy name: let the heart of them rejoice that
seek the LORD.

105:4 Seek the LORD, and his strength: seek his face evermore.

105:5 Remember his marvellous works that he hath done; his wonders,
and the judgments of his mouth;

105:6 O ye seed of Abraham his servant, ye children of Jacob his
chosen.

105:7 He is the LORD our God: his judgments are in all the earth.

105:8 He hath remembered his covenant for ever, the word which he
commanded to a thousand generations.

105:9 Which covenant he made with Abraham, and his oath unto Isaac;

105:10 And confirmed the same unto Jacob for a law, and to Israel for
an everlasting covenant:

105:11 Saying, Unto thee will I give the land of Canaan, the lot of
your inheritance:

105:12 When they were but a few men in number; yea, very few, and
strangers in it.

105:13 When they went from one nation to another, from one kingdom to
another people;

105:14 He suffered no man to do them wrong: yea, he reproved kings for
their sakes;

105:15 Saying, Touch not mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm.

105:16 Moreover he called for a famine upon the land: he brake the
whole staff of bread.

105:17 He sent a man before them, even Joseph, who was sold for a
servant:

105:18 Whose feet they hurt with fetters: he was laid in iron:

105:19 Until the time that his word came: the word of the LORD tried
him.

105:20 The king sent and loosed him; even the ruler of the people, and
let him go free.

105:21 He made him lord of his house, and ruler of all his substance:

105:22 To bind his princes at his pleasure; and teach his senators
wisdom.

105:23 Israel also came into Egypt; and Jacob sojourned in the land of
Ham.

105:24 And he increased his people greatly; and made them stronger
than their enemies.

105:25 He turned their heart to hate his people, to deal subtilly with
his servants.

105:26 He sent Moses his servant; and Aaron whom he had chosen.

105:27 They shewed his signs among them, and wonders in the land of
Ham.

105:28 He sent darkness, and made it dark; and they rebelled not
against his word.

105:29 He turned their waters into blood, and slew their fish.

105:30 Their land brought forth frogs in abundance, in the chambers of
their kings.

105:31 He spake, and there came divers sorts of flies, and lice in all
their coasts.

105:32 He gave them hail for rain, and flaming fire in their land.

105:33 He smote their vines also and their fig trees; and brake the
trees of their coasts.

105:34 He spake, and the locusts came, and caterpillers, and that
without number,

105:35 And did eat up all the herbs in their land, and devoured the
fruit of their ground.

105:36 He smote also all the firstborn in their land, the chief of all
their strength.

105:37 He brought them forth also with silver and gold: and there was
not one feeble person among their tribes.

105:38 Egypt was glad when they departed: for the fear of them fell
upon them.

105:39 He spread a cloud for a covering; and fire to give light in the
night.

105:40 The people asked, and he brought quails, and satisfied them
with the bread of heaven.

105:41 He opened the rock, and the waters gushed out; they ran in the
dry places like a river.

105:42 For he remembered his holy promise, and Abraham his servant.

105:43 And he brought forth his people with joy, and his chosen with
gladness:

105:44 And gave them the lands of the heathen: and they inherited the
labour of the people;

105:45 That they might observe his statutes, and keep his laws. Praise
ye the LORD.



106:1 Praise ye the LORD. O give thanks unto the LORD; for he is good:
for his mercy endureth for ever.

106:2 Who can utter the mighty acts of the LORD? who can shew forth
all his praise?

106:3 Blessed are they that keep judgment, and he that doeth
righteousness at all times.

106:4 Remember me, O LORD, with the favour that thou bearest unto thy
people: O visit me with thy salvation;

106:5 That I may see the good of thy chosen, that I may rejoice in the
gladness of thy nation, that I may glory with thine inheritance.

106:6 We have sinned with our fathers, we have committed iniquity, we
have done wickedly.

106:7 Our fathers understood not thy wonders in Egypt; they remembered
not the multitude of thy mercies; but provoked him at the sea, even at
the Red sea.

106:8 Nevertheless he saved them for his name's sake, that he might
make his mighty power to be known.

106:9 He rebuked the Red sea also, and it was dried up: so he led them
through the depths, as through the wilderness.

106:10 And he saved them from the hand of him that hated them, and
redeemed them from the hand of the enemy.

106:11 And the waters covered their enemies: there was not one of them
left.

106:12 Then believed they his words; they sang his praise.

106:13 They soon forgat his works; they waited not for his counsel:

106:14 But lusted exceedingly in the wilderness, and tempted God in
the desert.

106:15 And he gave them their request; but sent leanness into their
soul.

106:16 They envied Moses also in the camp, and Aaron the saint of the
LORD.

106:17 The earth opened and swallowed up Dathan and covered the
company of Abiram.

106:18 And a fire was kindled in their company; the flame burned up
the wicked.

106:19 They made a calf in Horeb, and worshipped the molten image.

106:20 Thus they changed their glory into the similitude of an ox that
eateth grass.

106:21 They forgat God their saviour, which had done great things in
Egypt;

106:22 Wondrous works in the land of Ham, and terrible things by the
Red sea.

106:23 Therefore he said that he would destroy them, had not Moses his
chosen stood before him in the breach, to turn away his wrath, lest he
should destroy them.

106:24 Yea, they despised the pleasant land, they believed not his
word:

106:25 But murmured in their tents, and hearkened not unto the voice
of the LORD.

106:26 Therefore he lifted up his hand against them, to overthrow them
in the wilderness:

106:27 To overthrow their seed also among the nations, and to scatter
them in the lands.

106:28 They joined themselves also unto Baalpeor, and ate the
sacrifices of the dead.

106:29 Thus they provoked him to anger with their inventions: and the
plague brake in upon them.

106:30 Then stood up Phinehas, and executed judgment: and so the
plague was stayed.

106:31 And that was counted unto him for righteousness unto all
generations for evermore.

106:32 They angered him also at the waters of strife, so that it went
ill with Moses for their sakes:

106:33 Because they provoked his spirit, so that he spake unadvisedly
with his lips.

106:34 They did not destroy the nations, concerning whom the LORD
commanded them:

106:35 But were mingled among the heathen, and learned their works.

106:36 And they served their idols: which were a snare unto them.

106:37 Yea, they sacrificed their sons and their daughters unto
devils,

106:38 And shed innocent blood, even the blood of their sons and of
their daughters, whom they sacrificed unto the idols of Canaan: and
the land was polluted with blood.

106:39 Thus were they defiled with their own works, and went a whoring
with their own inventions.

106:40 Therefore was the wrath of the LORD kindled against his people,
insomuch that he abhorred his own inheritance.

106:41 And he gave them into the hand of the heathen; and they that
hated them ruled over them.

106:42 Their enemies also oppressed them, and they were brought into
subjection under their hand.

106:43 Many times did he deliver them; but they provoked him with
their counsel, and were brought low for their iniquity.

106:44 Nevertheless he regarded their affliction, when he heard their
cry:

106:45 And he remembered for them his covenant, and repented according
to the multitude of his mercies.

106:46 He made them also to be pitied of all those that carried them
captives.

106:47 Save us, O LORD our God, and gather us from among the heathen,
to give thanks unto thy holy name, and to triumph in thy praise.

106:48 Blessed be the LORD God of Israel from everlasting to
everlasting: and let all the people say, Amen. Praise ye the LORD.



107:1 O give thanks unto the LORD, for he is good: for his mercy
endureth for ever.

107:2 Let the redeemed of the LORD say so, whom he hath redeemed from
the hand of the enemy;

107:3 And gathered them out of the lands, from the east, and from the
west, from the north, and from the south.

107:4 They wandered in the wilderness in a solitary way; they found no
city to dwell in.

107:5 Hungry and thirsty, their soul fainted in them.

107:6 Then they cried unto the LORD in their trouble, and he delivered
them out of their distresses.

107:7 And he led them forth by the right way, that they might go to a
city of habitation.

107:8 Oh that men would praise the LORD for his goodness, and for his
wonderful works to the children of men!

107:9 For he satisfieth the longing soul, and filleth the hungry soul
with goodness.

107:10 Such as sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, being bound
in affliction and iron;

107:11 Because they rebelled against the words of God, and contemned
the counsel of the most High:

107:12 Therefore he brought down their heart with labour; they fell
down, and there was none to help.

107:13 Then they cried unto the LORD in their trouble, and he saved
them out of their distresses.

107:14 He brought them out of darkness and the shadow of death, and
brake their bands in sunder.

107:15 Oh that men would praise the LORD for his goodness, and for his
wonderful works to the children of men!

107:16 For he hath broken the gates of brass, and cut the bars of iron
in sunder.

107:17 Fools because of their transgression, and because of their
iniquities, are afflicted.

107:18 Their soul abhorreth all manner of meat; and they draw near
unto the gates of death.

107:19 Then they cry unto the LORD in their trouble, and he saveth
them out of their distresses.

107:20 He sent his word, and healed them, and delivered them from
their destructions.

107:21 Oh that men would praise the LORD for his goodness, and for his
wonderful works to the children of men!

107:22 And let them sacrifice the sacrifices of thanksgiving, and
declare his works with rejoicing.

107:23 They that go down to the sea in ships, that do business in
great waters;

107:24 These see the works of the LORD, and his wonders in the deep.

107:25 For he commandeth, and raiseth the stormy wind, which lifteth
up the waves thereof.

107:26 They mount up to the heaven, they go down again to the depths:
their soul is melted because of trouble.

107:27 They reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and are
at their wit's end.

107:28 Then they cry unto the LORD in their trouble, and he bringeth
them out of their distresses.

107:29 He maketh the storm a calm, so that the waves thereof are
still.

107:30 Then are they glad because they be quiet; so he bringeth them
unto their desired haven.

107:31 Oh that men would praise the LORD for his goodness, and for his
wonderful works to the children of men!

107:32 Let them exalt him also in the congregation of the people, and
praise him in the assembly of the elders.

107:33 He turneth rivers into a wilderness, and the watersprings into
dry ground;

107:34 A fruitful land into barrenness, for the wickedness of them
that dwell therein.

107:35 He turneth the wilderness into a standing water, and dry ground
into watersprings.

107:36 And there he maketh the hungry to dwell, that they may prepare
a city for habitation;

107:37 And sow the fields, and plant vineyards, which may yield fruits
of increase.

107:38 He blesseth them also, so that they are multiplied greatly; and
suffereth not their cattle to decrease.

107:39 Again, they are minished and brought low through oppression,
affliction, and sorrow.

107:40 He poureth contempt upon princes, and causeth them to wander in
the wilderness, where there is no way.

107:41 Yet setteth he the poor on high from affliction, and maketh him
families like a flock.

107:42 The righteous shall see it, and rejoice: and all iniquity shall
stop her mouth.

107:43 Whoso is wise, and will observe these things, even they shall
understand the lovingkindness of the LORD.



108:1 O god, my heart is fixed; I will sing and give praise, even with
my glory.

108:2 Awake, psaltery and harp: I myself will awake early.

108:3 I will praise thee, O LORD, among the people: and I will sing
praises unto thee among the nations.

108:4 For thy mercy is great above the heavens: and thy truth reacheth
unto the clouds.

108:5 Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens: and thy glory above
all the earth;

108:6 That thy beloved may be delivered: save with thy right hand, and
answer me.

108:7 God hath spoken in his holiness; I will rejoice, I will divide
Shechem, and mete out the valley of Succoth.

108:8 Gilead is mine; Manasseh is mine; Ephraim also is the strength
of mine head; Judah is my lawgiver;

108:9 Moab is my washpot; over Edom will I cast out my shoe; over
Philistia will I triumph.

108:10 Who will bring me into the strong city? who will lead me into
Edom?

108:11 Wilt not thou, O God, who hast cast us off? and wilt not thou,
O God, go forth with our hosts?

108:12 Give us help from trouble: for vain is the help of man.

108:13 Through God we shall do valiantly: for he it is that shall
tread down our enemies.



109:1 Hold not thy peace, O God of my praise;

109:2 For the mouth of the wicked and the mouth of the deceitful are
opened against me: they have spoken against me with a lying tongue.

109:3 They compassed me about also with words of hatred; and fought
against me without a cause.

109:4 For my love they are my adversaries: but I give myself unto
prayer.

109:5 And they have rewarded me evil for good, and hatred for my love.

109:6 Set thou a wicked man over him: and let Satan stand at his right
hand.

109:7 When he shall be judged, let him be condemned: and let his
prayer become sin.

109:8 Let his days be few; and let another take his office.

109:9 Let his children be fatherless, and his wife a widow.

109:10 Let his children be continually vagabonds, and beg: let them
seek their bread also out of their desolate places.

109:11 Let the extortioner catch all that he hath; and let the
strangers spoil his labour.

109:12 Let there be none to extend mercy unto him: neither let there
be any to favour his fatherless children.

109:13 Let his posterity be cut off; and in the generation following
let their name be blotted out.

109:14 Let the iniquity of his fathers be remembered with the LORD;
and let not the sin of his mother be blotted out.

109:15 Let them be before the LORD continually, that he may cut off
the memory of them from the earth.

109:16 Because that he remembered not to shew mercy, but persecuted
the poor and needy man, that he might even slay the broken in heart.

109:17 As he loved cursing, so let it come unto him: as he delighted
not in blessing, so let it be far from him.

109:18 As he clothed himself with cursing like as with his garment, so
let it come into his bowels like water, and like oil into his bones.

109:19 Let it be unto him as the garment which covereth him, and for a
girdle wherewith he is girded continually.

109:20 Let this be the reward of mine adversaries from the LORD, and
of them that speak evil against my soul.

109:21 But do thou for me, O GOD the Lord, for thy name's sake:
because thy mercy is good, deliver thou me.

109:22 For I am poor and needy, and my heart is wounded within me.

109:23 I am gone like the shadow when it declineth: I am tossed up and
down as the locust.

109:24 My knees are weak through fasting; and my flesh faileth of
fatness.

109:25 I became also a reproach unto them: when they looked upon me
they shaked their heads.

109:26 Help me, O LORD my God: O save me according to thy mercy:

109:27 That they may know that this is thy hand; that thou, LORD, hast
done it.

109:28 Let them curse, but bless thou: when they arise, let them be
ashamed; but let thy servant rejoice.

109:29 Let mine adversaries be clothed with shame, and let them cover
themselves with their own confusion, as with a mantle.

109:30 I will greatly praise the LORD with my mouth; yea, I will
praise him among the multitude.

109:31 For he shall stand at the right hand of the poor, to save him
from those that condemn his soul.



110:1 The LORD said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, until I
make thine enemies thy footstool.

110:2 The LORD shall send the rod of thy strength out of Zion: rule
thou in the midst of thine enemies.

110:3 Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, in the
beauties of holiness from the womb of the morning: thou hast the dew
of thy youth.

110:4 The LORD hath sworn, and will not repent, Thou art a priest for
ever after the order of Melchizedek.

110:5 The Lord at thy right hand shall strike through kings in the day
of his wrath.

110:6 He shall judge among the heathen, he shall fill the places with
the dead bodies; he shall wound the heads over many countries.

110:7 He shall drink of the brook in the way: therefore shall he lift
up the head.



111:1 Praise ye the LORD. I will praise the LORD with my whole heart,
in the assembly of the upright, and in the congregation.

111:2 The works of the LORD are great, sought out of all them that
have pleasure therein.

111:3 His work is honourable and glorious: and his righteousness
endureth for ever.

111:4 He hath made his wonderful works to be remembered: the LORD is
gracious and full of compassion.

111:5 He hath given meat unto them that fear him: he will ever be
mindful of his covenant.

111:6 He hath shewed his people the power of his works, that he may
give them the heritage of the heathen.

111:7 The works of his hands are verity and judgment; all his
commandments are sure.

111:8 They stand fast for ever and ever, and are done in truth and
uprightness.

111:9 He sent redemption unto his people: he hath commanded his
covenant for ever: holy and reverend is his name.

111:10 The fear of the LORD is the beginning of wisdom: a good
understanding have all they that do his commandments: his praise
endureth for ever.



112:1 Praise ye the LORD. Blessed is the man that feareth the LORD,
that delighteth greatly in his commandments.

112:2 His seed shall be mighty upon earth: the generation of the
upright shall be blessed.

112:3 Wealth and riches shall be in his house: and his righteousness
endureth for ever.

112:4 Unto the upright there ariseth light in the darkness: he is
gracious, and full of compassion, and righteous.

112:5 A good man sheweth favour, and lendeth: he will guide his
affairs with discretion.

112:6 Surely he shall not be moved for ever: the righteous shall be in
everlasting remembrance.

112:7 He shall not be afraid of evil tidings: his heart is fixed,
trusting in the LORD.

112:8 His heart is established, he shall not be afraid, until he see
his desire upon his enemies.

112:9 He hath dispersed, he hath given to the poor; his righteousness
endureth for ever; his horn shall be exalted with honour.

112:10 The wicked shall see it, and be grieved; he shall gnash with
his teeth, and melt away: the desire of the wicked shall perish.



113:1 Praise ye the LORD. Praise, O ye servants of the LORD, praise
the name of the LORD.

113:2 Blessed be the name of the LORD from this time forth and for
evermore.

113:3 From the rising of the sun unto the going down of the same the
LORD's name is to be praised.

113:4 The LORD is high above all nations, and his glory above the
heavens.

113:5 Who is like unto the LORD our God, who dwelleth on high,

113:6 Who humbleth himself to behold the things that are in heaven,
and in the earth!

113:7 He raiseth up the poor out of the dust, and lifteth the needy
out of the dunghill;

113:8 That he may set him with princes, even with the princes of his
people.

113:9 He maketh the barren woman to keep house, and to be a joyful
mother of children. Praise ye the LORD.



114:1 When Israel went out of Egypt, the house of Jacob from a people
of strange language;

114:2 Judah was his sanctuary, and Israel his dominion.

114:3 The sea saw it, and fled: Jordan was driven back.

114:4 The mountains skipped like rams, and the little hills like
lambs.

114:5 What ailed thee, O thou sea, that thou fleddest? thou Jordan,
that thou wast driven back?

114:6 Ye mountains, that ye skipped like rams; and ye little hills,
like lambs?

114:7 Tremble, thou earth, at the presence of the Lord, at the
presence of the God of Jacob;

114:8 Which turned the rock into a standing water, the flint into a
fountain of waters.



115:1 Not unto us, O LORD, not unto us, but unto thy name give glory,
for thy mercy, and for thy truth's sake.

115:2 Wherefore should the heathen say, Where is now their God?

115:3 But our God is in the heavens: he hath done whatsoever he hath
pleased.

115:4 Their idols are silver and gold, the work of men's hands.

115:5 They have mouths, but they speak not: eyes have they, but they
see not:

115:6 They have ears, but they hear not: noses have they, but they
smell not:

115:7 They have hands, but they handle not: feet have they, but they
walk not: neither speak they through their throat.

115:8 They that make them are like unto them; so is every one that
trusteth in them.

115:9 O Israel, trust thou in the LORD: he is their help and their
shield.

115:10 O house of Aaron, trust in the LORD: he is their help and their
shield.

115:11 Ye that fear the LORD, trust in the LORD: he is their help and
their shield.

115:12 The LORD hath been mindful of us: he will bless us; he will
bless the house of Israel; he will bless the house of Aaron.

115:13 He will bless them that fear the LORD, both small and great.

115:14 The LORD shall increase you more and more, you and your
children.

115:15 Ye are blessed of the LORD which made heaven and earth.

115:16 The heaven, even the heavens, are the LORD's: but the earth
hath he given to the children of men.

115:17 The dead praise not the LORD, neither any that go down into
silence.

115:18 But we will bless the LORD from this time forth and for
evermore.

Praise the LORD.



116:1 I love the LORD, because he hath heard my voice and my
supplications.

116:2 Because he hath inclined his ear unto me, therefore will I call
upon him as long as I live.

116:3 The sorrows of death compassed me, and the pains of hell gat
hold upon me: I found trouble and sorrow.

116:4 Then called I upon the name of the LORD; O LORD, I beseech thee,
deliver my soul.

116:5 Gracious is the LORD, and righteous; yea, our God is merciful.

116:6 The LORD preserveth the simple: I was brought low, and he helped
me.

116:7 Return unto thy rest, O my soul; for the LORD hath dealt
bountifully with thee.

116:8 For thou hast delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from
tears, and my feet from falling.

116:9 I will walk before the LORD in the land of the living.

116:10 I believed, therefore have I spoken: I was greatly afflicted:

116:11 I said in my haste, All men are liars.

116:12 What shall I render unto the LORD for all his benefits toward
me?

116:13 I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the
LORD.

116:14 I will pay my vows unto the LORD now in the presence of all his
people.

116:15 Precious in the sight of the LORD is the death of his saints.

116:16 O LORD, truly I am thy servant; I am thy servant, and the son
of thine handmaid: thou hast loosed my bonds.

116:17 I will offer to thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and will
call upon the name of the LORD.

116:18 I will pay my vows unto the LORD now in the presence of all his
people.

116:19 In the courts of the LORD's house, in the midst of thee, O
Jerusalem. Praise ye the LORD.



117:1 O praise the LORD, all ye nations: praise him, all ye people.

117:2 For his merciful kindness is great toward us: and the truth of
the LORD endureth for ever. Praise ye the LORD.



118:1 O give thanks unto the LORD; for he is good: because his mercy
endureth for ever.

118:2 Let Israel now say, that his mercy endureth for ever.

118:3 Let the house of Aaron now say, that his mercy endureth for
ever.

118:4 Let them now that fear the LORD say, that his mercy endureth for
ever.

118:5 I called upon the LORD in distress: the LORD answered me, and
set me in a large place.

118:6 The LORD is on my side; I will not fear: what can man do unto
me?

118:7 The LORD taketh my part with them that help me: therefore shall
I see my desire upon them that hate me.

118:8 It is better to trust in the LORD than to put confidence in man.

118:9 It is better to trust in the LORD than to put confidence in
princes.

118:10 All nations compassed me about: but in the name of the LORD
will I destroy them.

118:11 They compassed me about; yea, they compassed me about: but in
the name of the LORD I will destroy them.

118:12 They compassed me about like bees: they are quenched as the
fire of thorns: for in the name of the LORD I will destroy them.

118:13 Thou hast thrust sore at me that I might fall: but the LORD
helped me.

118:14 The LORD is my strength and song, and is become my salvation.

118:15 The voice of rejoicing and salvation is in the tabernacles of
the righteous: the right hand of the LORD doeth valiantly.

118:16 The right hand of the LORD is exalted: the right hand of the
LORD doeth valiantly.

118:17 I shall not die, but live, and declare the works of the LORD.

118:18 The LORD hath chastened me sore: but he hath not given me over
unto death.

118:19 Open to me the gates of righteousness: I will go into them, and
I will praise the LORD:

118:20 This gate of the LORD, into which the righteous shall enter.

118:21 I will praise thee: for thou hast heard me, and art become my
salvation.

118:22 The stone which the builders refused is become the head stone
of the corner.

118:23 This is the LORD's doing; it is marvellous in our eyes.

118:24 This is the day which the LORD hath made; we will rejoice and
be glad in it.

118:25 Save now, I beseech thee, O LORD: O LORD, I beseech thee, send
now prosperity.

118:26 Blessed be he that cometh in the name of the LORD: we have
blessed you out of the house of the LORD.

118:27 God is the LORD, which hath shewed us light: bind the sacrifice
with cords, even unto the horns of the altar.

118:28 Thou art my God, and I will praise thee: thou art my God, I
will exalt thee.

118:29 O give thanks unto the LORD; for he is good: for his mercy
endureth for ever.



119:1 Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk in the law of the
LORD.

119:2 Blessed are they that keep his testimonies, and that seek him
with the whole heart.

119:3 They also do no iniquity: they walk in his ways.

119:4 Thou hast commanded us to keep thy precepts diligently.

119:5 O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes!

119:6 Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect unto all thy
commandments.

119:7 I will praise thee with uprightness of heart, when I shall have
learned thy righteous judgments.

119:8 I will keep thy statutes: O forsake me not utterly.

119:9 Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? by taking heed
thereto according to thy word.

119:10 With my whole heart have I sought thee: O let me not wander
from thy commandments.

119:11 Thy word have I hid in mine heart, that I might not sin against
thee.

119:12 Blessed art thou, O LORD: teach me thy statutes.

119:13 With my lips have I declared all the judgments of thy mouth.

119:14 I have rejoiced in the way of thy testimonies, as much as in
all riches.

119:15 I will meditate in thy precepts, and have respect unto thy
ways.

119:16 I will delight myself in thy statutes: I will not forget thy
word.

119:17 Deal bountifully with thy servant, that I may live, and keep
thy word.

119:18 Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of
thy law.

119:19 I am a stranger in the earth: hide not thy commandments from
me.

119:20 My soul breaketh for the longing that it hath unto thy
judgments at all times.

119:21 Thou hast rebuked the proud that are cursed, which do err from
thy commandments.

119:22 Remove from me reproach and contempt; for I have kept thy
testimonies.

119:23 Princes also did sit and speak against me: but thy servant did
meditate in thy statutes.

119:24 Thy testimonies also are my delight and my counsellors.

119:25 My soul cleaveth unto the dust: quicken thou me according to
thy word.

119:26 I have declared my ways, and thou heardest me: teach me thy
statutes.

119:27 Make me to understand the way of thy precepts: so shall I talk
of thy wondrous works.

119:28 My soul melteth for heaviness: strengthen thou me according
unto thy word.

119:29 Remove from me the way of lying: and grant me thy law
graciously.

119:30 I have chosen the way of truth: thy judgments have I laid
before me.

119:31 I have stuck unto thy testimonies: O LORD, put me not to shame.

119:32 I will run the way of thy commandments, when thou shalt enlarge
my heart.

119:33 Teach me, O LORD, the way of thy statutes; and I shall keep it
unto the end.

119:34 Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy law; yea, I shall
observe it with my whole heart.

119:35 Make me to go in the path of thy commandments; for therein do I
delight.

119:36 Incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not to covetousness.

119:37 Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity; and quicken thou me
in thy way.

119:38 Stablish thy word unto thy servant, who is devoted to thy fear.

119:39 Turn away my reproach which I fear: for thy judgments are good.

119:40 Behold, I have longed after thy precepts: quicken me in thy
righteousness.

119:41 Let thy mercies come also unto me, O LORD, even thy salvation,
according to thy word.

119:42 So shall I have wherewith to answer him that reproacheth me:
for I trust in thy word.

119:43 And take not the word of truth utterly out of my mouth; for I
have hoped in thy judgments.

119:44 So shall I keep thy law continually for ever and ever.

119:45 And I will walk at liberty: for I seek thy precepts.

119:46 I will speak of thy testimonies also before kings, and will not
be ashamed.

119:47 And I will delight myself in thy commandments, which I have
loved.

119:48 My hands also will I lift up unto thy commandments, which I
have loved; and I will meditate in thy statutes.

119:49 Remember the word unto thy servant, upon which thou hast caused
me to hope.

119:50 This is my comfort in my affliction: for thy word hath
quickened me.

119:51 The proud have had me greatly in derision: yet have I not
declined from thy law.

119:52 I remembered thy judgments of old, O LORD; and have comforted
myself.

119:53 Horror hath taken hold upon me because of the wicked that
forsake thy law.

119:54 Thy statutes have been my songs in the house of my pilgrimage.

119:55 I have remembered thy name, O LORD, in the night, and have kept
thy law.

119:56 This I had, because I kept thy precepts.

119:57 Thou art my portion, O LORD: I have said that I would keep thy
words.

119:58 I intreated thy favour with my whole heart: be merciful unto me
according to thy word.

119:59 I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies.

119:60 I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy commandments.

119:61 The bands of the wicked have robbed me: but I have not
forgotten thy law.

119:62 At midnight I will rise to give thanks unto thee because of thy
righteous judgments.

119:63 I am a companion of all them that fear thee, and of them that
keep thy precepts.

119:64 The earth, O LORD, is full of thy mercy: teach me thy statutes.

119:65 Thou hast dealt well with thy servant, O LORD, according unto
thy word.

119:66 Teach me good judgment and knowledge: for I have believed thy
commandments.

119:67 Before I was afflicted I went astray: but now have I kept thy
word.

119:68 Thou art good, and doest good; teach me thy statutes.

119:69 The proud have forged a lie against me: but I will keep thy
precepts with my whole heart.

119:70 Their heart is as fat as grease; but I delight in thy law.

119:71 It is good for me that I have been afflicted; that I might
learn thy statutes.

119:72 The law of thy mouth is better unto me than thousands of gold
and silver.

119:73 Thy hands have made me and fashioned me: give me understanding,
that I may learn thy commandments.

119:74 They that fear thee will be glad when they see me; because I
have hoped in thy word.

119:75 I know, O LORD, that thy judgments are right, and that thou in
faithfulness hast afflicted me.

119:76 Let, I pray thee, thy merciful kindness be for my comfort,
according to thy word unto thy servant.

119:77 Let thy tender mercies come unto me, that I may live: for thy
law is my delight.

119:78 Let the proud be ashamed; for they dealt perversely with me
without a cause: but I will meditate in thy precepts.

119:79 Let those that fear thee turn unto me, and those that have
known thy testimonies.

119:80 Let my heart be sound in thy statutes; that I be not ashamed.

119:81 My soul fainteth for thy salvation: but I hope in thy word.

119:82 Mine eyes fail for thy word, saying, When wilt thou comfort me?

119:83 For I am become like a bottle in the smoke; yet do I not forget
thy statutes.

119:84 How many are the days of thy servant? when wilt thou execute
judgment on them that persecute me?

119:85 The proud have digged pits for me, which are not after thy law.

119:86 All thy commandments are faithful: they persecute me
wrongfully; help thou me.

119:87 They had almost consumed me upon earth; but I forsook not thy
precepts.

119:88 Quicken me after thy lovingkindness; so shall I keep the
testimony of thy mouth.

119:89 For ever, O LORD, thy word is settled in heaven.

119:90 Thy faithfulness is unto all generations: thou hast established
the earth, and it abideth.

119:91 They continue this day according to thine ordinances: for all
are thy servants.

119:92 Unless thy law had been my delights, I should then have
perished in mine affliction.

119:93 I will never forget thy precepts: for with them thou hast
quickened me.

119:94 I am thine, save me: for I have sought thy precepts.

119:95 The wicked have waited for me to destroy me: but I will
consider thy testimonies.

119:96 I have seen an end of all perfection: but thy commandment is
exceeding broad.

119:97 O how I love thy law! it is my meditation all the day.

119:98 Thou through thy commandments hast made me wiser than mine
enemies: for they are ever with me.

119:99 I have more understanding than all my teachers: for thy
testimonies are my meditation.

119:100 I understand more than the ancients, because I keep thy
precepts.

119:101 I have refrained my feet from every evil way, that I might
keep thy word.

119:102 I have not departed from thy judgments: for thou hast taught
me.

119:103 How sweet are thy words unto my taste! yea, sweeter than honey
to my mouth!

119:104 Through thy precepts I get understanding: therefore I hate
every false way.

119:105 Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path.

119:106 I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy
righteous judgments.

119:107 I am afflicted very much: quicken me, O LORD, according unto
thy word.

119:108 Accept, I beseech thee, the freewill offerings of my mouth, O
LORD, and teach me thy judgments.

119:109 My soul is continually in my hand: yet do I not forget thy
law.

119:110 The wicked have laid a snare for me: yet I erred not from thy
precepts.

119:111 Thy testimonies have I taken as an heritage for ever: for they
are the rejoicing of my heart.

119:112 I have inclined mine heart to perform thy statutes alway, even
unto the end.

119:113 I hate vain thoughts: but thy law do I love.

119:114 Thou art my hiding place and my shield: I hope in thy word.

119:115 Depart from me, ye evildoers: for I will keep the commandments
of my God.

119:116 Uphold me according unto thy word, that I may live: and let me
not be ashamed of my hope.

119:117 Hold thou me up, and I shall be safe: and I will have respect
unto thy statutes continually.

119:118 Thou hast trodden down all them that err from thy statutes:
for their deceit is falsehood.

119:119 Thou puttest away all the wicked of the earth like dross:
therefore I love thy testimonies.

119:120 My flesh trembleth for fear of thee; and I am afraid of thy
judgments.

119:121 I have done judgment and justice: leave me not to mine
oppressors.

119:122 Be surety for thy servant for good: let not the proud oppress
me.

119:123 Mine eyes fail for thy salvation, and for the word of thy
righteousness.

119:124 Deal with thy servant according unto thy mercy, and teach me
thy statutes.

119:125 I am thy servant; give me understanding, that I may know thy
testimonies.

119:126 It is time for thee, LORD, to work: for they have made void
thy law.

119:127 Therefore I love thy commandments above gold; yea, above fine
gold.

119:128 Therefore I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to
be right; and I hate every false way.

119:129 Thy testimonies are wonderful: therefore doth my soul keep
them.

119:130 The entrance of thy words giveth light; it giveth
understanding unto the simple.

119:131 I opened my mouth, and panted: for I longed for thy
commandments.

119:132 Look thou upon me, and be merciful unto me, as thou usest to
do unto those that love thy name.

119:133 Order my steps in thy word: and let not any iniquity have
dominion over me.

119:134 Deliver me from the oppression of man: so will I keep thy
precepts.

119:135 Make thy face to shine upon thy servant; and teach me thy
statutes.

119:136 Rivers of waters run down mine eyes, because they keep not thy
law.

119:137 Righteous art thou, O LORD, and upright are thy judgments.

119:138 Thy testimonies that thou hast commanded are righteous and
very faithful.

119:139 My zeal hath consumed me, because mine enemies have forgotten
thy words.

119:140 Thy word is very pure: therefore thy servant loveth it.

119:141 I am small and despised: yet do not I forget thy precepts.

119:142 Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness, and thy law
is the truth.

119:143 Trouble and anguish have taken hold on me: yet thy
commandments are my delights.

119:144 The righteousness of thy testimonies is everlasting: give me
understanding, and I shall live.

119:145 I cried with my whole heart; hear me, O LORD: I will keep thy
statutes.

119:146 I cried unto thee; save me, and I shall keep thy testimonies.

119:147 I prevented the dawning of the morning, and cried: I hoped in
thy word.

119:148 Mine eyes prevent the night watches, that I might meditate in
thy word.

119:149 Hear my voice according unto thy lovingkindness: O LORD,
quicken me according to thy judgment.

119:150 They draw nigh that follow after mischief: they are far from
thy law.

119:151 Thou art near, O LORD; and all thy commandments are truth.

119:152 Concerning thy testimonies, I have known of old that thou hast
founded them for ever.

119:153 Consider mine affliction, and deliver me: for I do not forget
thy law.

119:154 Plead my cause, and deliver me: quicken me according to thy
word.

119:155 Salvation is far from the wicked: for they seek not thy
statutes.

119:156 Great are thy tender mercies, O LORD: quicken me according to
thy judgments.

119:157 Many are my persecutors and mine enemies; yet do I not decline
from thy testimonies.

119:158 I beheld the transgressors, and was grieved; because they kept
not thy word.

119:159 Consider how I love thy precepts: quicken me, O LORD,
according to thy lovingkindness.

119:160 Thy word is true from the beginning: and every one of thy
righteous judgments endureth for ever.

119:161 Princes have persecuted me without a cause: but my heart
standeth in awe of thy word.

119:162 I rejoice at thy word, as one that findeth great spoil.

119:163 I hate and abhor lying: but thy law do I love.

119:164 Seven times a day do I praise thee because of thy righteous
judgments.

119:165 Great peace have they which love thy law: and nothing shall
offend them.

119:166 LORD, I have hoped for thy salvation, and done thy
commandments.

119:167 My soul hath kept thy testimonies; and I love them
exceedingly.

119:168 I have kept thy precepts and thy testimonies: for all my ways
are before thee.

119:169 Let my cry come near before thee, O LORD: give me
understanding according to thy word.

119:170 Let my supplication come before thee: deliver me according to
thy word.

119:171 My lips shall utter praise, when thou hast taught me thy
statutes.

119:172 My tongue shall speak of thy word: for all thy commandments
are righteousness.

119:173 Let thine hand help me; for I have chosen thy precepts.

119:174 I have longed for thy salvation, O LORD; and thy law is my
delight.

119:175 Let my soul live, and it shall praise thee; and let thy
judgments help me.

119:176 I have gone astray like a lost sheep; seek thy servant; for I
do not forget thy commandments.



120:1 In my distress I cried unto the LORD, and he heard me.

120:2 Deliver my soul, O LORD, from lying lips, and from a deceitful
tongue.

120:3 What shall be given unto thee? or what shall be done unto thee,
thou false tongue?

120:4 Sharp arrows of the mighty, with coals of juniper.

120:5 Woe is me, that I sojourn in Mesech, that I dwell in the tents
of Kedar!

120:6 My soul hath long dwelt with him that hateth peace.

120:7 I am for peace: but when I speak, they are for war.



121:1 I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills, from whence cometh my
help.

121:2 My help cometh from the LORD, which made heaven and earth.

121:3 He will not suffer thy foot to be moved: he that keepeth thee
will not slumber.

121:4 Behold, he that keepeth Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep.

121:5 The LORD is thy keeper: the LORD is thy shade upon thy right
hand.

121:6 The sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the moon by night.

121:7 The LORD shall preserve thee from all evil: he shall preserve
thy soul.

121:8 The LORD shall preserve thy going out and thy coming in from
this time forth, and even for evermore.



122:1 I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of
the LORD.

122:2 Our feet shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem.

122:3 Jerusalem is builded as a city that is compact together:

122:4 Whither the tribes go up, the tribes of the LORD, unto the
testimony of Israel, to give thanks unto the name of the LORD.

122:5 For there are set thrones of judgment, the thrones of the house
of David.

122:6 Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: they shall prosper that love
thee.

122:7 Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces.

122:8 For my brethren and companions' sakes, I will now say, Peace be
within thee.

122:9 Because of the house of the LORD our God I will seek thy good.



123:1 Unto thee lift I up mine eyes, O thou that dwellest in the
heavens.

123:2 Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their
masters, and as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her mistress; so
our eyes wait upon the LORD our God, until that he have mercy upon us.

123:3 Have mercy upon us, O LORD, have mercy upon us: for we are
exceedingly filled with contempt.

123:4 Our soul is exceedingly filled with the scorning of those that
are at ease, and with the contempt of the proud.



124:1 If it had not been the LORD who was on our side, now may Israel
say;

124:2 If it had not been the LORD who was on our side, when men rose
up against us:

124:3 Then they had swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was
kindled against us:

124:4 Then the waters had overwhelmed us, the stream had gone over our
soul:

124:5 Then the proud waters had gone over our soul.

124:6 Blessed be the LORD, who hath not given us as a prey to their
teeth.

124:7 Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowlers:
the snare is broken, and we are escaped.

124:8 Our help is in the name of the LORD, who made heaven and earth.



125:1 They that trust in the LORD shall be as mount Zion, which cannot
be removed, but abideth for ever.

125:2 As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the LORD is round
about his people from henceforth even for ever.

125:3 For the rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the
righteous; lest the righteous put forth their hands unto iniquity.

125:4 Do good, O LORD, unto those that be good, and to them that are
upright in their hearts.

125:5 As for such as turn aside unto their crooked ways, the LORD
shall lead them forth with the workers of iniquity: but peace shall be
upon Israel.



126:1 When the LORD turned again the captivity of Zion, we were like
them that dream.

126:2 Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with
singing: then said they among the heathen, The LORD hath done great
things for them.

126:3 The LORD hath done great things for us; whereof we are glad.

126:4 Turn again our captivity, O LORD, as the streams in the south.

126:5 They that sow in tears shall reap in joy.

126:6 He that goeth forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall
doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him.



127:1 Except the LORD build the house, they labour in vain that build
it: except the LORD keep the city, the watchman waketh but in vain.

127:2 It is vain for you to rise up early, to sit up late, to eat the
bread of sorrows: for so he giveth his beloved sleep.

127:3 Lo, children are an heritage of the LORD: and the fruit of the
womb is his reward.

127:4 As arrows are in the hand of a mighty man; so are children of
the youth.

127:5 Happy is the man that hath his quiver full of them: they shall
not be ashamed, but they shall speak with the enemies in the gate.



128:1 Blessed is every one that feareth the LORD; that walketh in his
ways.

128:2 For thou shalt eat the labour of thine hands: happy shalt thou
be, and it shall be well with thee.

128:3 Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine by the sides of thine
house: thy children like olive plants round about thy table.

128:4 Behold, that thus shall the man be blessed that feareth the
LORD.

128:5 The LORD shall bless thee out of Zion: and thou shalt see the
good of Jerusalem all the days of thy life.

128:6 Yea, thou shalt see thy children's children, and peace upon
Israel.



129:1 Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth, may Israel now
say:

129:2 Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth: yet they have
not prevailed against me.

129:3 The plowers plowed upon my back: they made long their furrows.

129:4 The LORD is righteous: he hath cut asunder the cords of the
wicked.

129:5 Let them all be confounded and turned back that hate Zion.

129:6 Let them be as the grass upon the housetops, which withereth
afore it groweth up:

129:7 Wherewith the mower filleth not his hand; nor he that bindeth
sheaves his bosom.

129:8 Neither do they which go by say, The blessing of the LORD be
upon you: we bless you in the name of the LORD.



130:1 Out of the depths have I cried unto thee, O LORD.

130:2 Lord, hear my voice: let thine ears be attentive to the voice of
my supplications.

130:3 If thou, LORD, shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, who shall
stand?

130:4 But there is forgiveness with thee, that thou mayest be feared.

130:5 I wait for the LORD, my soul doth wait, and in his word do I
hope.

130:6 My soul waiteth for the Lord more than they that watch for the
morning: I say, more than they that watch for the morning.

130:7 Let Israel hope in the LORD: for with the LORD there is mercy,
and with him is plenteous redemption.

130:8 And he shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities.



131:1 Lord, my heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty: neither do I
exercise myself in great matters, or in things too high for me.

131:2 Surely I have behaved and quieted myself, as a child that is
weaned of his mother: my soul is even as a weaned child.

131:3 Let Israel hope in the LORD from henceforth and for ever.



132:1 Lord, remember David, and all his afflictions:

132:2 How he sware unto the LORD, and vowed unto the mighty God of
Jacob;

132:3 Surely I will not come into the tabernacle of my house, nor go
up into my bed;

132:4 I will not give sleep to mine eyes, or slumber to mine eyelids,

132:5 Until I find out a place for the LORD, an habitation for the
mighty God of Jacob.

132:6 Lo, we heard of it at Ephratah: we found it in the fields of the
wood.

132:7 We will go into his tabernacles: we will worship at his
footstool.

132:8 Arise, O LORD, into thy rest; thou, and the ark of thy strength.

132:9 Let thy priests be clothed with righteousness; and let thy
saints shout for joy.

132:10 For thy servant David's sake turn not away the face of thine
anointed.

132:11 The LORD hath sworn in truth unto David; he will not turn from
it; Of the fruit of thy body will I set upon thy throne.

132:12 If thy children will keep my covenant and my testimony that I
shall teach them, their children shall also sit upon thy throne for
evermore.

132:13 For the LORD hath chosen Zion; he hath desired it for his
habitation.

132:14 This is my rest for ever: here will I dwell; for I have desired
it.

132:15 I will abundantly bless her provision: I will satisfy her poor
with bread.

132:16 I will also clothe her priests with salvation: and her saints
shall shout aloud for joy.

132:17 There will I make the horn of David to bud: I have ordained a
lamp for mine anointed.

132:18 His enemies will I clothe with shame: but upon himself shall
his crown flourish.



133:1 Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell
together in unity!

133:2 It is like the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down
upon the beard, even Aaron's beard: that went down to the skirts of
his garments;

133:3 As the dew of Hermon, and as the dew that descended upon the
mountains of Zion: for there the LORD commanded the blessing, even
life for evermore.



134:1 Behold, bless ye the LORD, all ye servants of the LORD, which by
night stand in the house of the LORD.

134:2 Lift up your hands in the sanctuary, and bless the LORD.

134:3 The LORD that made heaven and earth bless thee out of Zion.



135:1 Praise ye the LORD. Praise ye the name of the LORD; praise him,
O ye servants of the LORD.

135:2 Ye that stand in the house of the LORD, in the courts of the
house of our God.

135:3 Praise the LORD; for the LORD is good: sing praises unto his
name; for it is pleasant.

135:4 For the LORD hath chosen Jacob unto himself, and Israel for his
peculiar treasure.

135:5 For I know that the LORD is great, and that our Lord is above
all gods.

135:6 Whatsoever the LORD pleased, that did he in heaven, and in
earth, in the seas, and all deep places.

135:7 He causeth the vapours to ascend from the ends of the earth; he
maketh lightnings for the rain; he bringeth the wind out of his
treasuries.

135:8 Who smote the firstborn of Egypt, both of man and beast.

135:9 Who sent tokens and wonders into the midst of thee, O Egypt,
upon Pharaoh, and upon all his servants.

135:10 Who smote great nations, and slew mighty kings;

135:11 Sihon king of the Amorites, and Og king of Bashan, and all the
kingdoms of Canaan:

135:12 And gave their land for an heritage, an heritage unto Israel
his people.

135:13 Thy name, O LORD, endureth for ever; and thy memorial, O LORD,
throughout all generations.

135:14 For the LORD will judge his people, and he will repent himself
concerning his servants.

135:15 The idols of the heathen are silver and gold, the work of men's
hands.

135:16 They have mouths, but they speak not; eyes have they, but they
see not;

135:17 They have ears, but they hear not; neither is there any breath
in their mouths.

135:18 They that make them are like unto them: so is every one that
trusteth in them.

135:19 Bless the LORD, O house of Israel: bless the LORD, O house of
Aaron:

135:20 Bless the LORD, O house of Levi: ye that fear the LORD, bless
the LORD.

135:21 Blessed be the LORD out of Zion, which dwelleth at Jerusalem.

Praise ye the LORD.



136:1 O give thanks unto the LORD; for he is good: for his mercy
endureth for ever.

136:2 O give thanks unto the God of gods: for his mercy endureth for
ever.

136:3 O give thanks to the Lord of lords: for his mercy endureth for
ever.

136:4 To him who alone doeth great wonders: for his mercy endureth for
ever.

136:5 To him that by wisdom made the heavens: for his mercy endureth
for ever.

136:6 To him that stretched out the earth above the waters: for his
mercy endureth for ever.

136:7 To him that made great lights: for his mercy endureth for ever:

136:8 The sun to rule by day: for his mercy endureth for ever:

136:9 The moon and stars to rule by night: for his mercy endureth for
ever.

136:10 To him that smote Egypt in their firstborn: for his mercy
endureth for ever:

136:11 And brought out Israel from among them: for his mercy endureth
for ever:

136:12 With a strong hand, and with a stretched out arm: for his mercy
endureth for ever.

136:13 To him which divided the Red sea into parts: for his mercy
endureth for ever:

136:14 And made Israel to pass through the midst of it: for his mercy
endureth for ever:

136:15 But overthrew Pharaoh and his host in the Red sea: for his
mercy endureth for ever.

136:16 To him which led his people through the wilderness: for his
mercy endureth for ever.

136:17 To him which smote great kings: for his mercy endureth for
ever:

136:18 And slew famous kings: for his mercy endureth for ever:

136:19 Sihon king of the Amorites: for his mercy endureth for ever:

136:20 And Og the king of Bashan: for his mercy endureth for ever:

136:21 And gave their land for an heritage: for his mercy endureth for
ever:

136:22 Even an heritage unto Israel his servant: for his mercy
endureth for ever.

136:23 Who remembered us in our low estate: for his mercy endureth for
ever:

136:24 And hath redeemed us from our enemies: for his mercy endureth
for ever.

136:25 Who giveth food to all flesh: for his mercy endureth for ever.

136:26 O give thanks unto the God of heaven: for his mercy endureth
for ever.



137:1 By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat down, yea, we wept, when
we remembered Zion.

137:2 We hanged our harps upon the willows in the midst thereof.

137:3 For there they that carried us away captive required of us a
song; and they that wasted us required of us mirth, saying, Sing us
one of the songs of Zion.

137:4 How shall we sing the LORD's song in a strange land?

137:5 If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her
cunning.

137:6 If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of
my mouth; if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy.

137:7 Remember, O LORD, the children of Edom in the day of Jerusalem;
who said, Rase it, rase it, even to the foundation thereof.

137:8 O daughter of Babylon, who art to be destroyed; happy shall he
be, that rewardeth thee as thou hast served us.

137:9 Happy shall he be, that taketh and dasheth thy little ones
against the stones.



138:1 I will praise thee with my whole heart: before the gods will I
sing praise unto thee.

138:2 I will worship toward thy holy temple, and praise thy name for
thy lovingkindness and for thy truth: for thou hast magnified thy word
above all thy name.

138:3 In the day when I cried thou answeredst me, and strengthenedst
me with strength in my soul.

138:4 All the kings of the earth shall praise thee, O LORD, when they
hear the words of thy mouth.

138:5 Yea, they shall sing in the ways of the LORD: for great is the
glory of the LORD.

138:6 Though the LORD be high, yet hath he respect unto the lowly: but
the proud he knoweth afar off.

138:7 Though I walk in the midst of trouble, thou wilt revive me: thou
shalt stretch forth thine hand against the wrath of mine enemies, and
thy right hand shall save me.

138:8 The LORD will perfect that which concerneth me: thy mercy, O
LORD, endureth for ever: forsake not the works of thine own hands.



139:1 O lord, thou hast searched me, and known me.

139:2 Thou knowest my downsitting and mine uprising, thou
understandest my thought afar off.

139:3 Thou compassest my path and my lying down, and art acquainted
with all my ways.

139:4 For there is not a word in my tongue, but, lo, O LORD, thou
knowest it altogether.

139:5 Thou hast beset me behind and before, and laid thine hand upon
me.

139:6 Such knowledge is too wonderful for me; it is high, I cannot
attain unto it.

139:7 Whither shall I go from thy spirit? or whither shall I flee from
thy presence?

139:8 If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there: if I make my bed in
hell, behold, thou art there.

139:9 If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost
parts of the sea;

139:10 Even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall
hold me.

139:11 If I say, Surely the darkness shall cover me; even the night
shall be light about me.

139:12 Yea, the darkness hideth not from thee; but the night shineth
as the day: the darkness and the light are both alike to thee.

139:13 For thou hast possessed my reins: thou hast covered me in my
mother's womb.

139:14 I will praise thee; for I am fearfully and wonderfully made:
marvellous are thy works; and that my soul knoweth right well.

139:15 My substance was not hid from thee, when I was made in secret,
and curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth.

139:16 Thine eyes did see my substance, yet being unperfect; and in
thy book all my members were written, which in continuance were
fashioned, when as yet there was none of them.

139:17 How precious also are thy thoughts unto me, O God! how great is
the sum of them!

139:18 If I should count them, they are more in number than the sand:
when I awake, I am still with thee.

139:19 Surely thou wilt slay the wicked, O God: depart from me
therefore, ye bloody men.

139:20 For they speak against thee wickedly, and thine enemies take
thy name in vain.

139:21 Do not I hate them, O LORD, that hate thee? and am not I
grieved with those that rise up against thee?

139:22 I hate them with perfect hatred: I count them mine enemies.

139:23 Search me, O God, and know my heart: try me, and know my
thoughts:

139:24 And see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the
way everlasting.



140:1 Deliver me, O LORD, from the evil man: preserve me from the
violent man;

140:2 Which imagine mischiefs in their heart; continually are they
gathered together for war.

140:3 They have sharpened their tongues like a serpent; adders' poison
is under their lips. Selah.

140:4 Keep me, O LORD, from the hands of the wicked; preserve me from
the violent man; who have purposed to overthrow my goings.

140:5 The proud have hid a snare for me, and cords; they have spread a
net by the wayside; they have set gins for me. Selah.

140:6 I said unto the LORD, Thou art my God: hear the voice of my
supplications, O LORD.

140:7 O GOD the Lord, the strength of my salvation, thou hast covered
my head in the day of battle.

140:8 Grant not, O LORD, the desires of the wicked: further not his
wicked device; lest they exalt themselves. Selah.

140:9 As for the head of those that compass me about, let the mischief
of their own lips cover them.

140:10 Let burning coals fall upon them: let them be cast into the
fire; into deep pits, that they rise not up again.

140:11 Let not an evil speaker be established in the earth: evil shall
hunt the violent man to overthrow him.

140:12 I know that the LORD will maintain the cause of the afflicted,
and the right of the poor.

140:13 Surely the righteous shall give thanks unto thy name: the
upright shall dwell in thy presence.



141:1 Lord, I cry unto thee: make haste unto me; give ear unto my
voice, when I cry unto thee.

141:2 Let my prayer be set forth before thee as incense; and the
lifting up of my hands as the evening sacrifice.

141:3 Set a watch, O LORD, before my mouth; keep the door of my lips.

141:4 Incline not my heart to any evil thing, to practise wicked works
with men that work iniquity: and let me not eat of their dainties.

141:5 Let the righteous smite me; it shall be a kindness: and let him
reprove me; it shall be an excellent oil, which shall not break my
head: for yet my prayer also shall be in their calamities.

141:6 When their judges are overthrown in stony places, they shall
hear my words; for they are sweet.

141:7 Our bones are scattered at the grave's mouth, as when one
cutteth and cleaveth wood upon the earth.

141:8 But mine eyes are unto thee, O GOD the Lord: in thee is my
trust; leave not my soul destitute.

141:9 Keep me from the snares which they have laid for me, and the
gins of the workers of iniquity.

141:10 Let the wicked fall into their own nets, whilst that I withal
escape.



142:1 I cried unto the LORD with my voice; with my voice unto the LORD
did I make my supplication.

142:2 I poured out my complaint before him; I shewed before him my
trouble.

142:3 When my spirit was overwhelmed within me, then thou knewest my
path.

In the way wherein I walked have they privily laid a snare for me.

142:4 I looked on my right hand, and beheld, but there was no man that
would know me: refuge failed me; no man cared for my soul.

142:5 I cried unto thee, O LORD: I said, Thou art my refuge and my
portion in the land of the living.

142:6 Attend unto my cry; for I am brought very low: deliver me from
my persecutors; for they are stronger than I.

142:7 Bring my soul out of prison, that I may praise thy name: the
righteous shall compass me about; for thou shalt deal bountifully with
me.



143:1 Hear my prayer, O LORD, give ear to my supplications: in thy
faithfulness answer me, and in thy righteousness.

143:2 And enter not into judgment with thy servant: for in thy sight
shall no man living be justified.

143:3 For the enemy hath persecuted my soul; he hath smitten my life
down to the ground; he hath made me to dwell in darkness, as those
that have been long dead.

143:4 Therefore is my spirit overwhelmed within me; my heart within me
is desolate.

143:5 I remember the days of old; I meditate on all thy works; I muse
on the work of thy hands.

143:6 I stretch forth my hands unto thee: my soul thirsteth after
thee, as a thirsty land. Selah.

143:7 Hear me speedily, O LORD: my spirit faileth: hide not thy face
from me, lest I be like unto them that go down into the pit.

143:8 Cause me to hear thy lovingkindness in the morning; for in thee
do I trust: cause me to know the way wherein I should walk; for I lift
up my soul unto thee.

143:9 Deliver me, O LORD, from mine enemies: I flee unto thee to hide
me.

143:10 Teach me to do thy will; for thou art my God: thy spirit is
good; lead me into the land of uprightness.

143:11 Quicken me, O LORD, for thy name's sake: for thy righteousness'
sake bring my soul out of trouble.

143:12 And of thy mercy cut off mine enemies, and destroy all them
that afflict my soul: for I am thy servant.



144:1 Blessed be the LORD my strength which teacheth my hands to war,
and my fingers to fight:

144:2 My goodness, and my fortress; my high tower, and my deliverer;
my shield, and he in whom I trust; who subdueth my people under me.

144:3 LORD, what is man, that thou takest knowledge of him! or the son
of man, that thou makest account of him!

144:4 Man is like to vanity: his days are as a shadow that passeth
away.

144:5 Bow thy heavens, O LORD, and come down: touch the mountains, and
they shall smoke.

144:6 Cast forth lightning, and scatter them: shoot out thine arrows,
and destroy them.

144:7 Send thine hand from above; rid me, and deliver me out of great
waters, from the hand of strange children;

144:8 Whose mouth speaketh vanity, and their right hand is a right
hand of falsehood.

144:9 I will sing a new song unto thee, O God: upon a psaltery and an
instrument of ten strings will I sing praises unto thee.

144:10 It is he that giveth salvation unto kings: who delivereth David
his servant from the hurtful sword.

144:11 Rid me, and deliver me from the hand of strange children, whose
mouth speaketh vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of
falsehood:

144:12 That our sons may be as plants grown up in their youth; that
our daughters may be as corner stones, polished after the similitude
of a palace:

144:13 That our garners may be full, affording all manner of store:
that our sheep may bring forth thousands and ten thousands in our
streets:

144:14 That our oxen may be strong to labour; that there be no
breaking in, nor going out; that there be no complaining in our
streets.

144:15 Happy is that people, that is in such a case: yea, happy is
that people, whose God is the LORD.



145:1 I will extol thee, my God, O king; and I will bless thy name for
ever and ever.

145:2 Every day will I bless thee; and I will praise thy name for ever
and ever.

145:3 Great is the LORD, and greatly to be praised; and his greatness
is unsearchable.

145:4 One generation shall praise thy works to another, and shall
declare thy mighty acts.

145:5 I will speak of the glorious honour of thy majesty, and of thy
wondrous works.

145:6 And men shall speak of the might of thy terrible acts: and I
will declare thy greatness.

145:7 They shall abundantly utter the memory of thy great goodness,
and shall sing of thy righteousness.

145:8 The LORD is gracious, and full of compassion; slow to anger, and
of great mercy.

145:9 The LORD is good to all: and his tender mercies are over all his
works.

145:10 All thy works shall praise thee, O LORD; and thy saints shall
bless thee.

145:11 They shall speak of the glory of thy kingdom, and talk of thy
power;

145:12 To make known to the sons of men his mighty acts, and the
glorious majesty of his kingdom.

145:13 Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion
endureth throughout all generations.

145:14 The LORD upholdeth all that fall, and raiseth up all those that
be bowed down.

145:15 The eyes of all wait upon thee; and thou givest them their meat
in due season.

145:16 Thou openest thine hand, and satisfiest the desire of every
living thing.

145:17 The LORD is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his
works.

145:18 The LORD is nigh unto all them that call upon him, to all that
call upon him in truth.

145:19 He will fulfil the desire of them that fear him: he also will
hear their cry, and will save them.

145:20 The LORD preserveth all them that love him: but all the wicked
will he destroy.

145:21 My mouth shall speak the praise of the LORD: and let all flesh
bless his holy name for ever and ever.



146:1 Praise ye the LORD. Praise the LORD, O my soul.

146:2 While I live will I praise the LORD: I will sing praises unto my
God while I have any being.

146:3 Put not your trust in princes, nor in the son of man, in whom
there is no help.

146:4 His breath goeth forth, he returneth to his earth; in that very
day his thoughts perish.

146:5 Happy is he that hath the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope
is in the LORD his God:

146:6 Which made heaven, and earth, the sea, and all that therein is:
which keepeth truth for ever:

146:7 Which executeth judgment for the oppressed: which giveth food to
the hungry. The LORD looseth the prisoners:

146:8 The LORD openeth the eyes of the blind: the LORD raiseth them
that are bowed down: the LORD loveth the righteous:

146:9 The LORD preserveth the strangers; he relieveth the fatherless
and widow: but the way of the wicked he turneth upside down.

146:10 The LORD shall reign for ever, even thy God, O Zion, unto all
generations. Praise ye the LORD.



147:1 Praise ye the LORD: for it is good to sing praises unto our God;
for it is pleasant; and praise is comely.

147:2 The LORD doth build up Jerusalem: he gathereth together the
outcasts of Israel.

147:3 He healeth the broken in heart, and bindeth up their wounds.

147:4 He telleth the number of the stars; he calleth them all by their
names.

147:5 Great is our Lord, and of great power: his understanding is
infinite.

147:6 The LORD lifteth up the meek: he casteth the wicked down to the
ground.

147:7 Sing unto the LORD with thanksgiving; sing praise upon the harp
unto our God:

147:8 Who covereth the heaven with clouds, who prepareth rain for the
earth, who maketh grass to grow upon the mountains.

147:9 He giveth to the beast his food, and to the young ravens which
cry.

147:10 He delighteth not in the strength of the horse: he taketh not
pleasure in the legs of a man.

147:11 The LORD taketh pleasure in them that fear him, in those that
hope in his mercy.

147:12 Praise the LORD, O Jerusalem; praise thy God, O Zion.

147:13 For he hath strengthened the bars of thy gates; he hath blessed
thy children within thee.

147:14 He maketh peace in thy borders, and filleth thee with the
finest of the wheat.

147:15 He sendeth forth his commandment upon earth: his word runneth
very swiftly.

147:16 He giveth snow like wool: he scattereth the hoarfrost like
ashes.

147:17 He casteth forth his ice like morsels: who can stand before his
cold?

147:18 He sendeth out his word, and melteth them: he causeth his wind
to blow, and the waters flow.

147:19 He sheweth his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments
unto Israel.

147:20 He hath not dealt so with any nation: and as for his judgments,
they have not known them. Praise ye the LORD.



148:1 Praise ye the LORD. Praise ye the LORD from the heavens: praise
him in the heights.

148:2 Praise ye him, all his angels: praise ye him, all his hosts.

148:3 Praise ye him, sun and moon: praise him, all ye stars of light.

148:4 Praise him, ye heavens of heavens, and ye waters that be above
the heavens.

148:5 Let them praise the name of the LORD: for he commanded, and they
were created.

148:6 He hath also stablished them for ever and ever: he hath made a
decree which shall not pass.

148:7 Praise the LORD from the earth, ye dragons, and all deeps:

148:8 Fire, and hail; snow, and vapours; stormy wind fulfilling his
word:

148:9 Mountains, and all hills; fruitful trees, and all cedars:

148:10 Beasts, and all cattle; creeping things, and flying fowl:

148:11 Kings of the earth, and all people; princes, and all judges of
the earth:

148:12 Both young men, and maidens; old men, and children:

148:13 Let them praise the name of the LORD: for his name alone is
excellent; his glory is above the earth and heaven.

148:14 He also exalteth the horn of his people, the praise of all his
saints; even of the children of Israel, a people near unto him. Praise
ye the LORD.



149:1 Praise ye the LORD. Sing unto the LORD a new song, and his
praise in the congregation of saints.

149:2 Let Israel rejoice in him that made him: let the children of
Zion be joyful in their King.

149:3 Let them praise his name in the dance: let them sing praises
unto him with the timbrel and harp.

149:4 For the LORD taketh pleasure in his people: he will beautify the
meek with salvation.

149:5 Let the saints be joyful in glory: let them sing aloud upon
their beds.

149:6 Let the high praises of God be in their mouth, and a two-edged
sword in their hand;

149:7 To execute vengeance upon the heathen, and punishments upon the
people;

149:8 To bind their kings with chains, and their nobles with fetters
of iron;

149:9 To execute upon them the judgment written: this honour have all
his saints. Praise ye the LORD.



150:1 Praise ye the LORD. Praise God in his sanctuary: praise him in
the firmament of his power.

150:2 Praise him for his mighty acts: praise him according to his
excellent greatness.

150:3 Praise him with the sound of the trumpet: praise him with the
psaltery and harp.

150:4 Praise him with the timbrel and dance: praise him with stringed
instruments and organs.

150:5 Praise him upon the loud cymbals: praise him upon the high
sounding cymbals.

150:6 Let every thing that hath breath praise the LORD. Praise ye the LORD.




The Proverbs


1:1 The proverbs of Solomon the son of David, king of Israel; 1:2 To
know wisdom and instruction; to perceive the words of understanding;
1:3 To receive the instruction of wisdom, justice, and judgment, and
equity; 1:4 To give subtilty to the simple, to the young man knowledge
and discretion.

1:5 A wise man will hear, and will increase learning; and a man of
understanding shall attain unto wise counsels: 1:6 To understand a
proverb, and the interpretation; the words of the wise, and their dark
sayings.

1:7 The fear of the LORD is the beginning of knowledge: but fools
despise wisdom and instruction.

1:8 My son, hear the instruction of thy father, and forsake not the
law of thy mother: 1:9 For they shall be an ornament of grace unto thy
head, and chains about thy neck.

1:10 My son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou not.

1:11 If they say, Come with us, let us lay wait for blood, let us lurk
privily for the innocent without cause: 1:12 Let us swallow them up
alive as the grave; and whole, as those that go down into the pit:
1:13 We shall find all precious substance, we shall fill our houses
with spoil: 1:14 Cast in thy lot among us; let us all have one purse:
1:15 My son, walk not thou in the way with them; refrain thy foot from
their path: 1:16 For their feet run to evil, and make haste to shed
blood.

1:17 Surely in vain the net is spread in the sight of any bird.

1:18 And they lay wait for their own blood; they lurk privily for
their own lives.

1:19 So are the ways of every one that is greedy of gain; which taketh
away the life of the owners thereof.

1:20 Wisdom crieth without; she uttereth her voice in the streets:
1:21 She crieth in the chief place of concourse, in the openings of
the gates: in the city she uttereth her words, saying, 1:22 How long,
ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity? and the scorners delight in
their scorning, and fools hate knowledge?  1:23 Turn you at my
reproof: behold, I will pour out my spirit unto you, I will make known
my words unto you.

1:24 Because I have called, and ye refused; I have stretched out my
hand, and no man regarded; 1:25 But ye have set at nought all my
counsel, and would none of my reproof: 1:26 I also will laugh at your
calamity; I will mock when your fear cometh; 1:27 When your fear
cometh as desolation, and your destruction cometh as a whirlwind; when
distress and anguish cometh upon you.

1:28 Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall
seek me early, but they shall not find me: 1:29 For that they hated
knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the LORD: 1:30 They would
none of my counsel: they despised all my reproof.

1:31 Therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be
filled with their own devices.

1:32 For the turning away of the simple shall slay them, and the
prosperity of fools shall destroy them.

1:33 But whoso hearkeneth unto me shall dwell safely, and shall be
quiet from fear of evil.

2:1 My son, if thou wilt receive my words, and hide my commandments
with thee; 2:2 So that thou incline thine ear unto wisdom, and apply
thine heart to understanding; 2:3 Yea, if thou criest after knowledge,
and liftest up thy voice for understanding; 2:4 If thou seekest her as
silver, and searchest for her as for hid treasures; 2:5 Then shalt
thou understand the fear of the LORD, and find the knowledge of God.

2:6 For the LORD giveth wisdom: out of his mouth cometh knowledge and
understanding.

2:7 He layeth up sound wisdom for the righteous: he is a buckler to
them that walk uprightly.

2:8 He keepeth the paths of judgment, and preserveth the way of his
saints.

2:9 Then shalt thou understand righteousness, and judgment, and
equity; yea, every good path.

2:10 When wisdom entereth into thine heart, and knowledge is pleasant
unto thy soul; 2:11 Discretion shall preserve thee, understanding
shall keep thee: 2:12 To deliver thee from the way of the evil man,
from the man that speaketh froward things; 2:13 Who leave the paths of
uprightness, to walk in the ways of darkness; 2:14 Who rejoice to do
evil, and delight in the frowardness of the wicked; 2:15 Whose ways
are crooked, and they froward in their paths: 2:16 To deliver thee
from the strange woman, even from the stranger which flattereth with
her words; 2:17 Which forsaketh the guide of her youth, and forgetteth
the covenant of her God.

2:18 For her house inclineth unto death, and her paths unto the dead.

2:19 None that go unto her return again, neither take they hold of the
paths of life.

2:20 That thou mayest walk in the way of good men, and keep the paths
of the righteous.

2:21 For the upright shall dwell in the land, and the perfect shall
remain in it.

2:22 But the wicked shall be cut off from the earth, and the
transgressors shall be rooted out of it.

3:1 My son, forget not my law; but let thine heart keep my
commandments: 3:2 For length of days, and long life, and peace, shall
they add to thee.

3:3 Let not mercy and truth forsake thee: bind them about thy neck;
write them upon the table of thine heart: 3:4 So shalt thou find
favour and good understanding in the sight of God and man.

3:5 Trust in the LORD with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine
own understanding.

3:6 In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths.

3:7 Be not wise in thine own eyes: fear the LORD, and depart from
evil.

3:8 It shall be health to thy navel, and marrow to thy bones.

3:9 Honour the LORD with thy substance, and with the firstfruits of
all thine increase: 3:10 So shall thy barns be filled with plenty, and
thy presses shall burst out with new wine.

3:11 My son, despise not the chastening of the LORD; neither be weary
of his correction: 3:12 For whom the LORD loveth he correcteth; even
as a father the son in whom he delighteth.

3:13 Happy is the man that findeth wisdom, and the man that getteth
understanding.

3:14 For the merchandise of it is better than the merchandise of
silver, and the gain thereof than fine gold.

3:15 She is more precious than rubies: and all the things thou canst
desire are not to be compared unto her.

3:16 Length of days is in her right hand; and in her left hand riches
and honour.

3:17 Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace.

3:18 She is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her: and happy
is every one that retaineth her.

3:19 The LORD by wisdom hath founded the earth; by understanding hath
he established the heavens.

3:20 By his knowledge the depths are broken up, and the clouds drop
down the dew.

3:21 My son, let not them depart from thine eyes: keep sound wisdom
and discretion: 3:22 So shall they be life unto thy soul, and grace to
thy neck.

3:23 Then shalt thou walk in thy way safely, and thy foot shall not
stumble.

3:24 When thou liest down, thou shalt not be afraid: yea, thou shalt
lie down, and thy sleep shall be sweet.

3:25 Be not afraid of sudden fear, neither of the desolation of the
wicked, when it cometh.

3:26 For the LORD shall be thy confidence, and shall keep thy foot
from being taken.

3:27 Withhold not good from them to whom it is due, when it is in the
power of thine hand to do it.

3:28 Say not unto thy neighbour, Go, and come again, and to morrow I
will give; when thou hast it by thee.

3:29 Devise not evil against thy neighbour, seeing he dwelleth
securely by thee.

3:30 Strive not with a man without cause, if he have done thee no
harm.

3:31 Envy thou not the oppressor, and choose none of his ways.

3:32 For the froward is abomination to the LORD: but his secret is
with the righteous.

3:33 The curse of the LORD is in the house of the wicked: but he
blesseth the habitation of the just.

3:34 Surely he scorneth the scorners: but he giveth grace unto the
lowly.

3:35 The wise shall inherit glory: but shame shall be the promotion of
fools.

4:1 Hear, ye children, the instruction of a father, and attend to know
understanding.

4:2 For I give you good doctrine, forsake ye not my law.

4:3 For I was my father's son, tender and only beloved in the sight of
my mother.

4:4 He taught me also, and said unto me, Let thine heart retain my
words: keep my commandments, and live.

4:5 Get wisdom, get understanding: forget it not; neither decline from
the words of my mouth.

4:6 Forsake her not, and she shall preserve thee: love her, and she
shall keep thee.

4:7 Wisdom is the principal thing; therefore get wisdom: and with all
thy getting get understanding.

4:8 Exalt her, and she shall promote thee: she shall bring thee to
honour, when thou dost embrace her.

4:9 She shall give to thine head an ornament of grace: a crown of
glory shall she deliver to thee.

4:10 Hear, O my son, and receive my sayings; and the years of thy life
shall be many.

4:11 I have taught thee in the way of wisdom; I have led thee in right
paths.

4:12 When thou goest, thy steps shall not be straitened; and when thou
runnest, thou shalt not stumble.

4:13 Take fast hold of instruction; let her not go: keep her; for she
is thy life.

4:14 Enter not into the path of the wicked, and go not in the way of
evil men.

4:15 Avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass away.

4:16 For they sleep not, except they have done mischief; and their
sleep is taken away, unless they cause some to fall.

4:17 For they eat the bread of wickedness, and drink the wine of
violence.

4:18 But the path of the just is as the shining light, that shineth
more and more unto the perfect day.

4:19 The way of the wicked is as darkness: they know not at what they
stumble.

4:20 My son, attend to my words; incline thine ear unto my sayings.

4:21 Let them not depart from thine eyes; keep them in the midst of
thine heart.

4:22 For they are life unto those that find them, and health to all
their flesh.

4:23 Keep thy heart with all diligence; for out of it are the issues
of life.

4:24 Put away from thee a froward mouth, and perverse lips put far
from thee.

4:25 Let thine eyes look right on, and let thine eyelids look straight
before thee.

4:26 Ponder the path of thy feet, and let all thy ways be established.

4:27 Turn not to the right hand nor to the left: remove thy foot from
evil.

5:1 My son, attend unto my wisdom, and bow thine ear to my
understanding: 5:2 That thou mayest regard discretion, and that thy
lips may keep knowledge.

5:3 For the lips of a strange woman drop as an honeycomb, and her
mouth is smoother than oil: 5:4 But her end is bitter as wormwood,
sharp as a two-edged sword.

5:5 Her feet go down to death; her steps take hold on hell.

5:6 Lest thou shouldest ponder the path of life, her ways are
moveable, that thou canst not know them.

5:7 Hear me now therefore, O ye children, and depart not from the
words of my mouth.

5:8 Remove thy way far from her, and come not nigh the door of her
house: 5:9 Lest thou give thine honour unto others, and thy years unto
the cruel: 5:10 Lest strangers be filled with thy wealth; and thy
labours be in the house of a stranger; 5:11 And thou mourn at the
last, when thy flesh and thy body are consumed, 5:12 And say, How have
I hated instruction, and my heart despised reproof; 5:13 And have not
obeyed the voice of my teachers, nor inclined mine ear to them that
instructed me!  5:14 I was almost in all evil in the midst of the
congregation and assembly.

5:15 Drink waters out of thine own cistern, and running waters out of
thine own well.

5:16 Let thy fountains be dispersed abroad, and rivers of waters in
the streets.

5:17 Let them be only thine own, and not strangers' with thee.

5:18 Let thy fountain be blessed: and rejoice with the wife of thy
youth.

5:19 Let her be as the loving hind and pleasant roe; let her breasts
satisfy thee at all times; and be thou ravished always with her love.

5:20 And why wilt thou, my son, be ravished with a strange woman, and
embrace the bosom of a stranger?  5:21 For the ways of man are before
the eyes of the LORD, and he pondereth all his goings.

5:22 His own iniquities shall take the wicked himself, and he shall be
holden with the cords of his sins.

5:23 He shall die without instruction; and in the greatness of his
folly he shall go astray.

6:1 My son, if thou be surety for thy friend, if thou hast stricken
thy hand with a stranger, 6:2 Thou art snared with the words of thy
mouth, thou art taken with the words of thy mouth.

6:3 Do this now, my son, and deliver thyself, when thou art come into
the hand of thy friend; go, humble thyself, and make sure thy friend.

6:4 Give not sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids.

6:5 Deliver thyself as a roe from the hand of the hunter, and as a
bird from the hand of the fowler.

6:6 Go to the ant, thou sluggard; consider her ways, and be wise: 6:7
Which having no guide, overseer, or ruler, 6:8 Provideth her meat in
the summer, and gathereth her food in the harvest.

6:9 How long wilt thou sleep, O sluggard? when wilt thou arise out of
thy sleep?  6:10 Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little
folding of the hands to sleep: 6:11 So shall thy poverty come as one
that travelleth, and thy want as an armed man.

6:12 A naughty person, a wicked man, walketh with a froward mouth.

6:13 He winketh with his eyes, he speaketh with his feet, he teacheth
with his fingers; 6:14 Frowardness is in his heart, he deviseth
mischief continually; he soweth discord.

6:15 Therefore shall his calamity come suddenly; suddenly shall he be
broken without remedy.

6:16 These six things doth the LORD hate: yea, seven are an
abomination unto him: 6:17 A proud look, a lying tongue, and hands
that shed innocent blood, 6:18 An heart that deviseth wicked
imaginations, feet that be swift in running to mischief, 6:19 A false
witness that speaketh lies, and he that soweth discord among brethren.

6:20 My son, keep thy father's commandment, and forsake not the law of
thy mother: 6:21 Bind them continually upon thine heart, and tie them
about thy neck.

6:22 When thou goest, it shall lead thee; when thou sleepest, it shall
keep thee; and when thou awakest, it shall talk with thee.

6:23 For the commandment is a lamp; and the law is light; and reproofs
of instruction are the way of life: 6:24 To keep thee from the evil
woman, from the flattery of the tongue of a strange woman.

6:25 Lust not after her beauty in thine heart; neither let her take
thee with her eyelids.

6:26 For by means of a whorish woman a man is brought to a piece of
bread: and the adultress will hunt for the precious life.

6:27 Can a man take fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be burned?
6:28 Can one go upon hot coals, and his feet not be burned?  6:29 So
he that goeth in to his neighbour's wife; whosoever toucheth her shall
not be innocent.

6:30 Men do not despise a thief, if he steal to satisfy his soul when
he is hungry; 6:31 But if he be found, he shall restore sevenfold; he
shall give all the substance of his house.

6:32 But whoso committeth adultery with a woman lacketh understanding:
he that doeth it destroyeth his own soul.

6:33 A wound and dishonour shall he get; and his reproach shall not be
wiped away.

6:34 For jealousy is the rage of a man: therefore he will not spare in
the day of vengeance.

6:35 He will not regard any ransom; neither will he rest content,
though thou givest many gifts.

7:1 My son, keep my words, and lay up my commandments with thee.

7:2 Keep my commandments, and live; and my law as the apple of thine
eye.

7:3 Bind them upon thy fingers, write them upon the table of thine
heart.

7:4 Say unto wisdom, Thou art my sister; and call understanding thy
kinswoman: 7:5 That they may keep thee from the strange woman, from
the stranger which flattereth with her words.

7:6 For at the window of my house I looked through my casement, 7:7
And beheld among the simple ones, I discerned among the youths, a
young man void of understanding, 7:8 Passing through the street near
her corner; and he went the way to her house, 7:9 In the twilight, in
the evening, in the black and dark night: 7:10 And, behold, there met
him a woman with the attire of an harlot, and subtil of heart.

7:11 (She is loud and stubborn; her feet abide not in her house: 7:12
Now is she without, now in the streets, and lieth in wait at every
corner.)  7:13 So she caught him, and kissed him, and with an impudent
face said unto him, 7:14 I have peace offerings with me; this day have
I payed my vows.

7:15 Therefore came I forth to meet thee, diligently to seek thy face,
and I have found thee.

7:16 I have decked my bed with coverings of tapestry, with carved
works, with fine linen of Egypt.

7:17 I have perfumed my bed with myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon.

7:18 Come, let us take our fill of love until the morning: let us
solace ourselves with loves.

7:19 For the goodman is not at home, he is gone a long journey: 7:20
He hath taken a bag of money with him, and will come home at the day
appointed.

7:21 With her much fair speech she caused him to yield, with the
flattering of her lips she forced him.

7:22 He goeth after her straightway, as an ox goeth to the slaughter,
or as a fool to the correction of the stocks; 7:23 Till a dart strike
through his liver; as a bird hasteth to the snare, and knoweth not
that it is for his life.

7:24 Hearken unto me now therefore, O ye children, and attend to the
words of my mouth.

7:25 Let not thine heart decline to her ways, go not astray in her
paths.

7:26 For she hath cast down many wounded: yea, many strong men have
been slain by her.

7:27 Her house is the way to hell, going down to the chambers of
death.

8:1 Doth not wisdom cry? and understanding put forth her voice?  8:2
She standeth in the top of high places, by the way in the places of
the paths.

8:3 She crieth at the gates, at the entry of the city, at the coming
in at the doors.

8:4 Unto you, O men, I call; and my voice is to the sons of man.

8:5 O ye simple, understand wisdom: and, ye fools, be ye of an
understanding heart.

8:6 Hear; for I will speak of excellent things; and the opening of my
lips shall be right things.

8:7 For my mouth shall speak truth; and wickedness is an abomination
to my lips.

8:8 All the words of my mouth are in righteousness; there is nothing
froward or perverse in them.

8:9 They are all plain to him that understandeth, and right to them
that find knowledge.

8:10 Receive my instruction, and not silver; and knowledge rather than
choice gold.

8:11 For wisdom is better than rubies; and all the things that may be
desired are not to be compared to it.

8:12 I wisdom dwell with prudence, and find out knowledge of witty
inventions.

8:13 The fear of the LORD is to hate evil: pride, and arrogancy, and
the evil way, and the froward mouth, do I hate.

8:14 Counsel is mine, and sound wisdom: I am understanding; I have
strength.

8:15 By me kings reign, and princes decree justice.

8:16 By me princes rule, and nobles, even all the judges of the earth.

8:17 I love them that love me; and those that seek me early shall find
me.

8:18 Riches and honour are with me; yea, durable riches and
righteousness.

8:19 My fruit is better than gold, yea, than fine gold; and my revenue
than choice silver.

8:20 I lead in the way of righteousness, in the midst of the paths of
judgment: 8:21 That I may cause those that love me to inherit
substance; and I will fill their treasures.

8:22 The LORD possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his
works of old.

8:23 I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the
earth was.

8:24 When there were no depths, I was brought forth; when there were
no fountains abounding with water.

8:25 Before the mountains were settled, before the hills was I brought
forth: 8:26 While as yet he had not made the earth, nor the fields,
nor the highest part of the dust of the world.

8:27 When he prepared the heavens, I was there: when he set a compass
upon the face of the depth: 8:28 When he established the clouds above:
when he strengthened the fountains of the deep: 8:29 When he gave to
the sea his decree, that the waters should not pass his commandment:
when he appointed the foundations of the earth: 8:30 Then I was by
him, as one brought up with him: and I was daily his delight,
rejoicing always before him; 8:31 Rejoicing in the habitable part of
his earth; and my delights were with the sons of men.

8:32 Now therefore hearken unto me, O ye children: for blessed are
they that keep my ways.

8:33 Hear instruction, and be wise, and refuse it not.

8:34 Blessed is the man that heareth me, watching daily at my gates,
waiting at the posts of my doors.

8:35 For whoso findeth me findeth life, and shall obtain favour of the
LORD.

8:36 But he that sinneth against me wrongeth his own soul: all they
that hate me love death.

9:1 Wisdom hath builded her house, she hath hewn out her seven
pillars: 9:2 She hath killed her beasts; she hath mingled her wine;
she hath also furnished her table.

9:3 She hath sent forth her maidens: she crieth upon the highest
places of the city, 9:4 Whoso is simple, let him turn in hither: as
for him that wanteth understanding, she saith to him, 9:5 Come, eat of
my bread, and drink of the wine which I have mingled.

9:6 Forsake the foolish, and live; and go in the way of understanding.

9:7 He that reproveth a scorner getteth to himself shame: and he that
rebuketh a wicked man getteth himself a blot.

9:8 Reprove not a scorner, lest he hate thee: rebuke a wise man, and
he will love thee.

9:9 Give instruction to a wise man, and he will be yet wiser: teach a
just man, and he will increase in learning.

9:10 The fear of the LORD is the beginning of wisdom: and the
knowledge of the holy is understanding.

9:11 For by me thy days shall be multiplied, and the years of thy life
shall be increased.

9:12 If thou be wise, thou shalt be wise for thyself: but if thou
scornest, thou alone shalt bear it.

9:13 A foolish woman is clamorous: she is simple, and knoweth nothing.

9:14 For she sitteth at the door of her house, on a seat in the high
places of the city, 9:15 To call passengers who go right on their
ways: 9:16 Whoso is simple, let him turn in hither: and as for him
that wanteth understanding, she saith to him, 9:17 Stolen waters are
sweet, and bread eaten in secret is pleasant.

9:18 But he knoweth not that the dead are there; and that her guests
are in the depths of hell.

10:1 The proverbs of Solomon. A wise son maketh a glad father: but a
foolish son is the heaviness of his mother.

10:2 Treasures of wickedness profit nothing: but righteousness
delivereth from death.

10:3 The LORD will not suffer the soul of the righteous to famish: but
he casteth away the substance of the wicked.

10:4 He becometh poor that dealeth with a slack hand: but the hand of
the diligent maketh rich.

10:5 He that gathereth in summer is a wise son: but he that sleepeth
in harvest is a son that causeth shame.

10:6 Blessings are upon the head of the just: but violence covereth
the mouth of the wicked.

10:7 The memory of the just is blessed: but the name of the wicked
shall rot.

10:8 The wise in heart will receive commandments: but a prating fool
shall fall.

10:9 He that walketh uprightly walketh surely: but he that perverteth
his ways shall be known.

10:10 He that winketh with the eye causeth sorrow: but a prating fool
shall fall.

10:11 The mouth of a righteous man is a well of life: but violence
covereth the mouth of the wicked.

10:12 Hatred stirreth up strifes: but love covereth all sins.

10:13 In the lips of him that hath understanding wisdom is found: but
a rod is for the back of him that is void of understanding.

10:14 Wise men lay up knowledge: but the mouth of the foolish is near
destruction.

10:15 The rich man's wealth is his strong city: the destruction of the
poor is their poverty.

10:16 The labour of the righteous tendeth to life: the fruit of the
wicked to sin.

10:17 He is in the way of life that keepeth instruction: but he that
refuseth reproof erreth.

10:18 He that hideth hatred with lying lips, and he that uttereth a
slander, is a fool.

10:19 In the multitude of words there wanteth not sin: but he that
refraineth his lips is wise.

10:20 The tongue of the just is as choice silver: the heart of the
wicked is little worth.

10:21 The lips of the righteous feed many: but fools die for want of
wisdom.

10:22 The blessing of the LORD, it maketh rich, and he addeth no
sorrow with it.

10:23 It is as sport to a fool to do mischief: but a man of
understanding hath wisdom.

10:24 The fear of the wicked, it shall come upon him: but the desire
of the righteous shall be granted.

10:25 As the whirlwind passeth, so is the wicked no more: but the
righteous is an everlasting foundation.

10:26 As vinegar to the teeth, and as smoke to the eyes, so is the
sluggard to them that send him.

10:27 The fear of the LORD prolongeth days: but the years of the
wicked shall be shortened.

10:28 The hope of the righteous shall be gladness: but the expectation
of the wicked shall perish.

10:29 The way of the LORD is strength to the upright: but destruction
shall be to the workers of iniquity.

10:30 The righteous shall never be removed: but the wicked shall not
inhabit the earth.

10:31 The mouth of the just bringeth forth wisdom: but the froward
tongue shall be cut out.

10:32 The lips of the righteous know what is acceptable: but the mouth
of the wicked speaketh frowardness.

11:1 A false balance is abomination to the LORD: but a just weight is
his delight.

11:2 When pride cometh, then cometh shame: but with the lowly is
wisdom.

11:3 The integrity of the upright shall guide them: but the
perverseness of transgressors shall destroy them.

11:4 Riches profit not in the day of wrath: but righteousness
delivereth from death.

11:5 The righteousness of the perfect shall direct his way: but the
wicked shall fall by his own wickedness.

11:6 The righteousness of the upright shall deliver them: but
transgressors shall be taken in their own naughtiness.

11:7 When a wicked man dieth, his expectation shall perish: and the
hope of unjust men perisheth.

11:8 The righteous is delivered out of trouble, and the wicked cometh
in his stead.

11:9 An hypocrite with his mouth destroyeth his neighbour: but through
knowledge shall the just be delivered.

11:10 When it goeth well with the righteous, the city rejoiceth: and
when the wicked perish, there is shouting.

11:11 By the blessing of the upright the city is exalted: but it is
overthrown by the mouth of the wicked.

11:12 He that is void of wisdom despiseth his neighbour: but a man of
understanding holdeth his peace.

11:13 A talebearer revealeth secrets: but he that is of a faithful
spirit concealeth the matter.

11:14 Where no counsel is, the people fall: but in the multitude of
counsellors there is safety.

11:15 He that is surety for a stranger shall smart for it: and he that
hateth suretiship is sure.

11:16 A gracious woman retaineth honour: and strong men retain riches.

11:17 The merciful man doeth good to his own soul: but he that is
cruel troubleth his own flesh.

11:18 The wicked worketh a deceitful work: but to him that soweth
righteousness shall be a sure reward.

11:19 As righteousness tendeth to life: so he that pursueth evil
pursueth it to his own death.

11:20 They that are of a froward heart are abomination to the LORD:
but such as are upright in their way are his delight.

11:21 Though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not be unpunished:
but the seed of the righteous shall be delivered.

11:22 As a jewel of gold in a swine's snout, so is a fair woman which
is without discretion.

11:23 The desire of the righteous is only good: but the expectation of
the wicked is wrath.

11:24 There is that scattereth, and yet increaseth; and there is that
withholdeth more than is meet, but it tendeth to poverty.

11:25 The liberal soul shall be made fat: and he that watereth shall
be watered also himself.

11:26 He that withholdeth corn, the people shall curse him: but
blessing shall be upon the head of him that selleth it.

11:27 He that diligently seeketh good procureth favour: but he that
seeketh mischief, it shall come unto him.

11:28 He that trusteth in his riches shall fall; but the righteous
shall flourish as a branch.

11:29 He that troubleth his own house shall inherit the wind: and the
fool shall be servant to the wise of heart.

11:30 The fruit of the righteous is a tree of life; and he that
winneth souls is wise.

11:31 Behold, the righteous shall be recompensed in the earth: much
more the wicked and the sinner.

12:1 Whoso loveth instruction loveth knowledge: but he that hateth
reproof is brutish.

12:2 A good man obtaineth favour of the LORD: but a man of wicked
devices will he condemn.

12:3 A man shall not be established by wickedness: but the root of the
righteous shall not be moved.

12:4 A virtuous woman is a crown to her husband: but she that maketh
ashamed is as rottenness in his bones.

12:5 The thoughts of the righteous are right: but the counsels of the
wicked are deceit.

12:6 The words of the wicked are to lie in wait for blood: but the
mouth of the upright shall deliver them.

12:7 The wicked are overthrown, and are not: but the house of the
righteous shall stand.

12:8 A man shall be commended according to his wisdom: but he that is
of a perverse heart shall be despised.

12:9 He that is despised, and hath a servant, is better than he that
honoureth himself, and lacketh bread.

12:10 A righteous man regardeth the life of his beast: but the tender
mercies of the wicked are cruel.

12:11 He that tilleth his land shall be satisfied with bread: but he
that followeth vain persons is void of understanding.

12:12 The wicked desireth the net of evil men: but the root of the
righteous yieldeth fruit.

12:13 The wicked is snared by the transgression of his lips: but the
just shall come out of trouble.

12:14 A man shall be satisfied with good by the fruit of his mouth:
and the recompence of a man's hands shall be rendered unto him.

12:15 The way of a fool is right in his own eyes: but he that
hearkeneth unto counsel is wise.

12:16 A fool's wrath is presently known: but a prudent man covereth
shame.

12:17 He that speaketh truth sheweth forth righteousness: but a false
witness deceit.

12:18 There is that speaketh like the piercings of a sword: but the
tongue of the wise is health.

12:19 The lip of truth shall be established for ever: but a lying
tongue is but for a moment.

12:20 Deceit is in the heart of them that imagine evil: but to the
counsellors of peace is joy.

12:21 There shall no evil happen to the just: but the wicked shall be
filled with mischief.

12:22 Lying lips are abomination to the LORD: but they that deal truly
are his delight.

12:23 A prudent man concealeth knowledge: but the heart of fools
proclaimeth foolishness.

12:24 The hand of the diligent shall bear rule: but the slothful shall
be under tribute.

12:25 Heaviness in the heart of man maketh it stoop: but a good word
maketh it glad.

12:26 The righteous is more excellent than his neighbour: but the way
of the wicked seduceth them.

12:27 The slothful man roasteth not that which he took in hunting: but
the substance of a diligent man is precious.

12:28 In the way of righteousness is life: and in the pathway thereof
there is no death.

13:1 A wise son heareth his father's instruction: but a scorner
heareth not rebuke.

13:2 A man shall eat good by the fruit of his mouth: but the soul of
the transgressors shall eat violence.

13:3 He that keepeth his mouth keepeth his life: but he that openeth
wide his lips shall have destruction.

13:4 The soul of the sluggard desireth, and hath nothing: but the soul
of the diligent shall be made fat.

13:5 A righteous man hateth lying: but a wicked man is loathsome, and
cometh to shame.

13:6 Righteousness keepeth him that is upright in the way: but
wickedness overthroweth the sinner.

13:7 There is that maketh himself rich, yet hath nothing: there is
that maketh himself poor, yet hath great riches.

13:8 The ransom of a man's life are his riches: but the poor heareth
not rebuke.

13:9 The light of the righteous rejoiceth: but the lamp of the wicked
shall be put out.

13:10 Only by pride cometh contention: but with the well advised is
wisdom.

13:11 Wealth gotten by vanity shall be diminished: but he that
gathereth by labour shall increase.

13:12 Hope deferred maketh the heart sick: but when the desire cometh,
it is a tree of life.

13:13 Whoso despiseth the word shall be destroyed: but he that feareth
the commandment shall be rewarded.

13:14 The law of the wise is a fountain of life, to depart from the
snares of death.

13:15 Good understanding giveth favour: but the way of transgressors
is hard.

13:16 Every prudent man dealeth with knowledge: but a fool layeth open
his folly.

13:17 A wicked messenger falleth into mischief: but a faithful
ambassador is health.

13:18 Poverty and shame shall be to him that refuseth instruction: but
he that regardeth reproof shall be honoured.

13:19 The desire accomplished is sweet to the soul: but it is
abomination to fools to depart from evil.

13:20 He that walketh with wise men shall be wise: but a companion of
fools shall be destroyed.

13:21 Evil pursueth sinners: but to the righteous good shall be
repayed.

13:22 A good man leaveth an inheritance to his children's children:
and the wealth of the sinner is laid up for the just.

13:23 Much food is in the tillage of the poor: but there is that is
destroyed for want of judgment.

13:24 He that spareth his rod hateth his son: but he that loveth him
chasteneth him betimes.

13:25 The righteous eateth to the satisfying of his soul: but the
belly of the wicked shall want.

14:1 Every wise woman buildeth her house: but the foolish plucketh it
down with her hands.

14:2 He that walketh in his uprightness feareth the LORD: but he that
is perverse in his ways despiseth him.

14:3 In the mouth of the foolish is a rod of pride: but the lips of
the wise shall preserve them.

14:4 Where no oxen are, the crib is clean: but much increase is by the
strength of the ox.

14:5 A faithful witness will not lie: but a false witness will utter
lies.

14:6 A scorner seeketh wisdom, and findeth it not: but knowledge is
easy unto him that understandeth.

14:7 Go from the presence of a foolish man, when thou perceivest not
in him the lips of knowledge.

14:8 The wisdom of the prudent is to understand his way: but the folly
of fools is deceit.

14:9 Fools make a mock at sin: but among the righteous there is
favour.

14:10 The heart knoweth his own bitterness; and a stranger doth not
intermeddle with his joy.

14:11 The house of the wicked shall be overthrown: but the tabernacle
of the upright shall flourish.

14:12 There is a way which seemeth right unto a man, but the end
thereof are the ways of death.

14:13 Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful; and the end of that
mirth is heaviness.

14:14 The backslider in heart shall be filled with his own ways: and a
good man shall be satisfied from himself.

14:15 The simple believeth every word: but the prudent man looketh
well to his going.

14:16 A wise man feareth, and departeth from evil: but the fool
rageth, and is confident.

14:17 He that is soon angry dealeth foolishly: and a man of wicked
devices is hated.

14:18 The simple inherit folly: but the prudent are crowned with
knowledge.

14:19 The evil bow before the good; and the wicked at the gates of the
righteous.

14:20 The poor is hated even of his own neighbour: but the rich hath
many friends.

14:21 He that despiseth his neighbour sinneth: but he that hath mercy
on the poor, happy is he.

14:22 Do they not err that devise evil? but mercy and truth shall be
to them that devise good.

14:23 In all labour there is profit: but the talk of the lips tendeth
only to penury.

14:24 The crown of the wise is their riches: but the foolishness of
fools is folly.

14:25 A true witness delivereth souls: but a deceitful witness
speaketh lies.

14:26 In the fear of the LORD is strong confidence: and his children
shall have a place of refuge.

14:27 The fear of the LORD is a fountain of life, to depart from the
snares of death.

14:28 In the multitude of people is the king's honour: but in the want
of people is the destruction of the prince.

14:29 He that is slow to wrath is of great understanding: but he that
is hasty of spirit exalteth folly.

14:30 A sound heart is the life of the flesh: but envy the rottenness
of the bones.

14:31 He that oppresseth the poor reproacheth his Maker: but he that
honoureth him hath mercy on the poor.

14:32 The wicked is driven away in his wickedness: but the righteous
hath hope in his death.

14:33 Wisdom resteth in the heart of him that hath understanding: but
that which is in the midst of fools is made known.

14:34 Righteousness exalteth a nation: but sin is a reproach to any
people.

14:35 The king's favour is toward a wise servant: but his wrath is
against him that causeth shame.

15:1 A soft answer turneth away wrath: but grievous words stir up
anger.

15:2 The tongue of the wise useth knowledge aright: but the mouth of
fools poureth out foolishness.

15:3 The eyes of the LORD are in every place, beholding the evil and
the good.

15:4 A wholesome tongue is a tree of life: but perverseness therein is
a breach in the spirit.

15:5 A fool despiseth his father's instruction: but he that regardeth
reproof is prudent.

15:6 In the house of the righteous is much treasure: but in the
revenues of the wicked is trouble.

15:7 The lips of the wise disperse knowledge: but the heart of the
foolish doeth not so.

15:8 The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the LORD: but
the prayer of the upright is his delight.

15:9 The way of the wicked is an abomination unto the LORD: but he
loveth him that followeth after righteousness.

15:10 Correction is grievous unto him that forsaketh the way: and he
that hateth reproof shall die.

15:11 Hell and destruction are before the LORD: how much more then the
hearts of the children of men?  15:12 A scorner loveth not one that
reproveth him: neither will he go unto the wise.

15:13 A merry heart maketh a cheerful countenance: but by sorrow of
the heart the spirit is broken.

15:14 The heart of him that hath understanding seeketh knowledge: but
the mouth of fools feedeth on foolishness.

15:15 All the days of the afflicted are evil: but he that is of a
merry heart hath a continual feast.

15:16 Better is little with the fear of the LORD than great treasure
and trouble therewith.

15:17 Better is a dinner of herbs where love is, than a stalled ox and
hatred therewith.

15:18 A wrathful man stirreth up strife: but he that is slow to anger
appeaseth strife.

15:19 The way of the slothful man is as an hedge of thorns: but the
way of the righteous is made plain.

15:20 A wise son maketh a glad father: but a foolish man despiseth his
mother.

15:21 Folly is joy to him that is destitute of wisdom: but a man of
understanding walketh uprightly.

15:22 Without counsel purposes are disappointed: but in the multitude
of counsellors they are established.

15:23 A man hath joy by the answer of his mouth: and a word spoken in
due season, how good is it!  15:24 The way of life is above to the
wise, that he may depart from hell beneath.

15:25 The LORD will destroy the house of the proud: but he will
establish the border of the widow.

15:26 The thoughts of the wicked are an abomination to the LORD: but
the words of the pure are pleasant words.

15:27 He that is greedy of gain troubleth his own house; but he that
hateth gifts shall live.

15:28 The heart of the righteous studieth to answer: but the mouth of
the wicked poureth out evil things.

15:29 The LORD is far from the wicked: but he heareth the prayer of
the righteous.

15:30 The light of the eyes rejoiceth the heart: and a good report
maketh the bones fat.

15:31 The ear that heareth the reproof of life abideth among the wise.

15:32 He that refuseth instruction despiseth his own soul: but he that
heareth reproof getteth understanding.

15:33 The fear of the LORD is the instruction of wisdom; and before
honour is humility.

16:1 The preparations of the heart in man, and the answer of the
tongue, is from the LORD.

16:2 All the ways of a man are clean in his own eyes; but the LORD
weigheth the spirits.

16:3 Commit thy works unto the LORD, and thy thoughts shall be
established.

16:4 The LORD hath made all things for himself: yea, even the wicked
for the day of evil.

16:5 Every one that is proud in heart is an abomination to the LORD:
though hand join in hand, he shall not be unpunished.

16:6 By mercy and truth iniquity is purged: and by the fear of the
LORD men depart from evil.

16:7 When a man's ways please the LORD, he maketh even his enemies to
be at peace with him.

16:8 Better is a little with righteousness than great revenues without
right.

16:9 A man's heart deviseth his way: but the LORD directeth his steps.

16:10 A divine sentence is in the lips of the king: his mouth
transgresseth not in judgment.

16:11 A just weight and balance are the LORD's: all the weights of the
bag are his work.

16:12 It is an abomination to kings to commit wickedness: for the
throne is established by righteousness.

16:13 Righteous lips are the delight of kings; and they love him that
speaketh right.

16:14 The wrath of a king is as messengers of death: but a wise man
will pacify it.

16:15 In the light of the king's countenance is life; and his favour
is as a cloud of the latter rain.

16:16 How much better is it to get wisdom than gold! and to get
understanding rather to be chosen than silver!  16:17 The highway of
the upright is to depart from evil: he that keepeth his way preserveth
his soul.

16:18 Pride goeth before destruction, and an haughty spirit before a
fall.

16:19 Better it is to be of an humble spirit with the lowly, than to
divide the spoil with the proud.

16:20 He that handleth a matter wisely shall find good: and whoso
trusteth in the LORD, happy is he.

16:21 The wise in heart shall be called prudent: and the sweetness of
the lips increaseth learning.

16:22 Understanding is a wellspring of life unto him that hath it: but
the instruction of fools is folly.

16:23 The heart of the wise teacheth his mouth, and addeth learning to
his lips.

16:24 Pleasant words are as an honeycomb, sweet to the soul, and
health to the bones.

16:25 There is a way that seemeth right unto a man, but the end
thereof are the ways of death.

16:26 He that laboureth laboureth for himself; for his mouth craveth
it of him.

16:27 An ungodly man diggeth up evil: and in his lips there is as a
burning fire.

16:28 A froward man soweth strife: and a whisperer separateth chief
friends.

16:29 A violent man enticeth his neighbour, and leadeth him into the
way that is not good.

16:30 He shutteth his eyes to devise froward things: moving his lips
he bringeth evil to pass.

16:31 The hoary head is a crown of glory, if it be found in the way of
righteousness.

16:32 He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty; and he that
ruleth his spirit than he that taketh a city.

16:33 The lot is cast into the lap; but the whole disposing thereof is
of the LORD.

17:1 Better is a dry morsel, and quietness therewith, than an house
full of sacrifices with strife.

17:2 A wise servant shall have rule over a son that causeth shame, and
shall have part of the inheritance among the brethren.

17:3 The fining pot is for silver, and the furnace for gold: but the
LORD trieth the hearts.

17:4 A wicked doer giveth heed to false lips; and a liar giveth ear to
a naughty tongue.

17:5 Whoso mocketh the poor reproacheth his Maker: and he that is glad
at calamities shall not be unpunished.

17:6 Children's children are the crown of old men; and the glory of
children are their fathers.

17:7 Excellent speech becometh not a fool: much less do lying lips a
prince.

17:8 A gift is as a precious stone in the eyes of him that hath it:
whithersoever it turneth, it prospereth.

17:9 He that covereth a transgression seeketh love; but he that
repeateth a matter separateth very friends.

17:10 A reproof entereth more into a wise man than an hundred stripes
into a fool.

17:11 An evil man seeketh only rebellion: therefore a cruel messenger
shall be sent against him.

17:12 Let a bear robbed of her whelps meet a man, rather than a fool
in his folly.

17:13 Whoso rewardeth evil for good, evil shall not depart from his
house.

17:14 The beginning of strife is as when one letteth out water:
therefore leave off contention, before it be meddled with.

17:15 He that justifieth the wicked, and he that condemneth the just,
even they both are abomination to the LORD.

17:16 Wherefore is there a price in the hand of a fool to get wisdom,
seeing he hath no heart to it?  17:17 A friend loveth at all times,
and a brother is born for adversity.

17:18 A man void of understanding striketh hands, and becometh surety
in the presence of his friend.

17:19 He loveth transgression that loveth strife: and he that exalteth
his gate seeketh destruction.

17:20 He that hath a froward heart findeth no good: and he that hath a
perverse tongue falleth into mischief.

17:21 He that begetteth a fool doeth it to his sorrow: and the father
of a fool hath no joy.

17:22 A merry heart doeth good like a medicine: but a broken spirit
drieth the bones.

17:23 A wicked man taketh a gift out of the bosom to pervert the ways
of judgment.

17:24 Wisdom is before him that hath understanding; but the eyes of a
fool are in the ends of the earth.

17:25 A foolish son is a grief to his father, and bitterness to her
that bare him.

17:26 Also to punish the just is not good, nor to strike princes for
equity.

17:27 He that hath knowledge spareth his words: and a man of
understanding is of an excellent spirit.

17:28 Even a fool, when he holdeth his peace, is counted wise: and he
that shutteth his lips is esteemed a man of understanding.

18:1 Through desire a man, having separated himself, seeketh and
intermeddleth with all wisdom.

18:2 A fool hath no delight in understanding, but that his heart may
discover itself.

18:3 When the wicked cometh, then cometh also contempt, and with
ignominy reproach.

18:4 The words of a man's mouth are as deep waters, and the wellspring
of wisdom as a flowing brook.

18:5 It is not good to accept the person of the wicked, to overthrow
the righteous in judgment.

18:6 A fool's lips enter into contention, and his mouth calleth for
strokes.

18:7 A fool's mouth is his destruction, and his lips are the snare of
his soul.

18:8 The words of a talebearer are as wounds, and they go down into
the innermost parts of the belly.

18:9 He also that is slothful in his work is brother to him that is a
great waster.

18:10 The name of the LORD is a strong tower: the righteous runneth
into it, and is safe.

18:11 The rich man's wealth is his strong city, and as an high wall in
his own conceit.

18:12 Before destruction the heart of man is haughty, and before
honour is humility.

18:13 He that answereth a matter before he heareth it, it is folly and
shame unto him.

18:14 The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity; but a wounded
spirit who can bear?  18:15 The heart of the prudent getteth
knowledge; and the ear of the wise seeketh knowledge.

18:16 A man's gift maketh room for him, and bringeth him before great
men.

18:17 He that is first in his own cause seemeth just; but his
neighbour cometh and searcheth him.

18:18 The lot causeth contentions to cease, and parteth between the
mighty.

18:19 A brother offended is harder to be won than a strong city: and
their contentions are like the bars of a castle.

18:20 A man's belly shall be satisfied with the fruit of his mouth;
and with the increase of his lips shall he be filled.

18:21 Death and life are in the power of the tongue: and they that
love it shall eat the fruit thereof.

18:22 Whoso findeth a wife findeth a good thing, and obtaineth favour
of the LORD.

18:23 The poor useth intreaties; but the rich answereth roughly.

18:24 A man that hath friends must shew himself friendly: and there is
a friend that sticketh closer than a brother.

19:1 Better is the poor that walketh in his integrity, than he that is
perverse in his lips, and is a fool.

19:2 Also, that the soul be without knowledge, it is not good; and he
that hasteth with his feet sinneth.

19:3 The foolishness of man perverteth his way: and his heart fretteth
against the LORD.

19:4 Wealth maketh many friends; but the poor is separated from his
neighbour.

19:5 A false witness shall not be unpunished, and he that speaketh
lies shall not escape.

19:6 Many will intreat the favour of the prince: and every man is a
friend to him that giveth gifts.

19:7 All the brethren of the poor do hate him: how much more do his
friends go far from him? he pursueth them with words, yet they are
wanting to him.

19:8 He that getteth wisdom loveth his own soul: he that keepeth
understanding shall find good.

19:9 A false witness shall not be unpunished, and he that speaketh
lies shall perish.

19:10 Delight is not seemly for a fool; much less for a servant to
have rule over princes.

19:11 The discretion of a man deferreth his anger; and it is his glory
to pass over a transgression.

19:12 The king's wrath is as the roaring of a lion; but his favour is
as dew upon the grass.

19:13 A foolish son is the calamity of his father: and the contentions
of a wife are a continual dropping.

19:14 House and riches are the inheritance of fathers: and a prudent
wife is from the LORD.

19:15 Slothfulness casteth into a deep sleep; and an idle soul shall
suffer hunger.

19:16 He that keepeth the commandment keepeth his own soul; but he
that despiseth his ways shall die.

19:17 He that hath pity upon the poor lendeth unto the LORD; and that
which he hath given will he pay him again.

19:18 Chasten thy son while there is hope, and let not thy soul spare
for his crying.

19:19 A man of great wrath shall suffer punishment: for if thou
deliver him, yet thou must do it again.

19:20 Hear counsel, and receive instruction, that thou mayest be wise
in thy latter end.

19:21 There are many devices in a man's heart; nevertheless the
counsel of the LORD, that shall stand.

19:22 The desire of a man is his kindness: and a poor man is better
than a liar.

19:23 The fear of the LORD tendeth to life: and he that hath it shall
abide satisfied; he shall not be visited with evil.

19:24 A slothful man hideth his hand in his bosom, and will not so
much as bring it to his mouth again.

19:25 Smite a scorner, and the simple will beware: and reprove one
that hath understanding, and he will understand knowledge.

19:26 He that wasteth his father, and chaseth away his mother, is a
son that causeth shame, and bringeth reproach.

19:27 Cease, my son, to hear the instruction that causeth to err from
the words of knowledge.

19:28 An ungodly witness scorneth judgment: and the mouth of the
wicked devoureth iniquity.

19:29 Judgments are prepared for scorners, and stripes for the back of
fools.

20:1 Wine is a mocker, strong drink is raging: and whosoever is
deceived thereby is not wise.

20:2 The fear of a king is as the roaring of a lion: whoso provoketh
him to anger sinneth against his own soul.

20:3 It is an honour for a man to cease from strife: but every fool
will be meddling.

20:4 The sluggard will not plow by reason of the cold; therefore shall
he beg in harvest, and have nothing.

20:5 Counsel in the heart of man is like deep water; but a man of
understanding will draw it out.

20:6 Most men will proclaim every one his own goodness: but a faithful
man who can find?  20:7 The just man walketh in his integrity: his
children are blessed after him.

20:8 A king that sitteth in the throne of judgment scattereth away all
evil with his eyes.

20:9 Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin?
20:10 Divers weights, and divers measures, both of them are alike
abomination to the LORD.

20:11 Even a child is known by his doings, whether his work be pure,
and whether it be right.

20:12 The hearing ear, and the seeing eye, the LORD hath made even
both of them.

20:13 Love not sleep, lest thou come to poverty; open thine eyes, and
thou shalt be satisfied with bread.

20:14 It is naught, it is naught, saith the buyer: but when he is gone
his way, then he boasteth.

20:15 There is gold, and a multitude of rubies: but the lips of
knowledge are a precious jewel.

20:16 Take his garment that is surety for a stranger: and take a
pledge of him for a strange woman.

20:17 Bread of deceit is sweet to a man; but afterwards his mouth
shall be filled with gravel.

20:18 Every purpose is established by counsel: and with good advice
make war.

20:19 He that goeth about as a talebearer revealeth secrets: therefore
meddle not with him that flattereth with his lips.

20:20 Whoso curseth his father or his mother, his lamp shall be put
out in obscure darkness.

20:21 An inheritance may be gotten hastily at the beginning; but the
end thereof shall not be blessed.

20:22 Say not thou, I will recompense evil; but wait on the LORD, and
he shall save thee.

20:23 Divers weights are an abomination unto the LORD; and a false
balance is not good.

20:24 Man's goings are of the LORD; how can a man then understand his
own way?  20:25 It is a snare to the man who devoureth that which is
holy, and after vows to make enquiry.

20:26 A wise king scattereth the wicked, and bringeth the wheel over
them.

20:27 The spirit of man is the candle of the LORD, searching all the
inward parts of the belly.

20:28 Mercy and truth preserve the king: and his throne is upholden by
mercy.

20:29 The glory of young men is their strength: and the beauty of old
men is the grey head.

20:30 The blueness of a wound cleanseth away evil: so do stripes the
inward parts of the belly.

21:1 The king's heart is in the hand of the LORD, as the rivers of
water: he turneth it whithersoever he will.

21:2 Every way of a man is right in his own eyes: but the LORD
pondereth the hearts.

21:3 To do justice and judgment is more acceptable to the LORD than
sacrifice.

21:4 An high look, and a proud heart, and the plowing of the wicked,
is sin.

21:5 The thoughts of the diligent tend only to plenteousness; but of
every one that is hasty only to want.

21:6 The getting of treasures by a lying tongue is a vanity tossed to
and fro of them that seek death.

21:7 The robbery of the wicked shall destroy them; because they refuse
to do judgment.

21:8 The way of man is froward and strange: but as for the pure, his
work is right.

21:9 It is better to dwell in a corner of the housetop, than with a
brawling woman in a wide house.

21:10 The soul of the wicked desireth evil: his neighbour findeth no
favour in his eyes.

21:11 When the scorner is punished, the simple is made wise: and when
the wise is instructed, he receiveth knowledge.

21:12 The righteous man wisely considereth the house of the wicked:
but God overthroweth the wicked for their wickedness.

21:13 Whoso stoppeth his ears at the cry of the poor, he also shall
cry himself, but shall not be heard.

21:14 A gift in secret pacifieth anger: and a reward in the bosom
strong wrath.

21:15 It is joy to the just to do judgment: but destruction shall be
to the workers of iniquity.

21:16 The man that wandereth out of the way of understanding shall
remain in the congregation of the dead.

21:17 He that loveth pleasure shall be a poor man: he that loveth wine
and oil shall not be rich.

21:18 The wicked shall be a ransom for the righteous, and the
transgressor for the upright.

21:19 It is better to dwell in the wilderness, than with a contentious
and an angry woman.

21:20 There is treasure to be desired and oil in the dwelling of the
wise; but a foolish man spendeth it up.

21:21 He that followeth after righteousness and mercy findeth life,
righteousness, and honour.

21:22 A wise man scaleth the city of the mighty, and casteth down the
strength of the confidence thereof.

21:23 Whoso keepeth his mouth and his tongue keepeth his soul from
troubles.

21:24 Proud and haughty scorner is his name, who dealeth in proud
wrath.

21:25 The desire of the slothful killeth him; for his hands refuse to
labour.

21:26 He coveteth greedily all the day long: but the righteous giveth
and spareth not.

21:27 The sacrifice of the wicked is abomination: how much more, when
he bringeth it with a wicked mind?  21:28 A false witness shall
perish: but the man that heareth speaketh constantly.

21:29 A wicked man hardeneth his face: but as for the upright, he
directeth his way.

21:30 There is no wisdom nor understanding nor counsel against the
LORD.

21:31 The horse is prepared against the day of battle: but safety is
of the LORD.

22:1 A GOOD name is rather to be chosen than great riches, and loving
favour rather than silver and gold.

22:2 The rich and poor meet together: the LORD is the maker of them
all.

22:3 A prudent man foreseeth the evil, and hideth himself: but the
simple pass on, and are punished.

22:4 By humility and the fear of the LORD are riches, and honour, and
life.

22:5 Thorns and snares are in the way of the froward: he that doth
keep his soul shall be far from them.

22:6 Train up a child in the way he should go: and when he is old, he
will not depart from it.

22:7 The rich ruleth over the poor, and the borrower is servant to the
lender.

22:8 He that soweth iniquity shall reap vanity: and the rod of his
anger shall fail.

22:9 He that hath a bountiful eye shall be blessed; for he giveth of
his bread to the poor.

22:10 Cast out the scorner, and contention shall go out; yea, strife
and reproach shall cease.

22:11 He that loveth pureness of heart, for the grace of his lips the
king shall be his friend.

22:12 The eyes of the LORD preserve knowledge, and he overthroweth the
words of the transgressor.

22:13 The slothful man saith, There is a lion without, I shall be
slain in the streets.

22:14 The mouth of strange women is a deep pit: he that is abhorred of
the LORD shall fall therein.

22:15 Foolishness is bound in the heart of a child; but the rod of
correction shall drive it far from him.

22:16 He that oppresseth the poor to increase his riches, and he that
giveth to the rich, shall surely come to want.

22:17 Bow down thine ear, and hear the words of the wise, and apply
thine heart unto my knowledge.

22:18 For it is a pleasant thing if thou keep them within thee; they
shall withal be fitted in thy lips.

22:19 That thy trust may be in the LORD, I have made known to thee
this day, even to thee.

22:20 Have not I written to thee excellent things in counsels and
knowledge, 22:21 That I might make thee know the certainty of the
words of truth; that thou mightest answer the words of truth to them
that send unto thee?  22:22 Rob not the poor, because he is poor:
neither oppress the afflicted in the gate: 22:23 For the LORD will
plead their cause, and spoil the soul of those that spoiled them.

22:24 Make no friendship with an angry man; and with a furious man
thou shalt not go: 22:25 Lest thou learn his ways, and get a snare to
thy soul.

22:26 Be not thou one of them that strike hands, or of them that are
sureties for debts.

22:27 If thou hast nothing to pay, why should he take away thy bed
from under thee?  22:28 Remove not the ancient landmark, which thy
fathers have set.

22:29 Seest thou a man diligent in his business? he shall stand before
kings; he shall not stand before mean men.

23:1 When thou sittest to eat with a ruler, consider diligently what
is before thee: 23:2 And put a knife to thy throat, if thou be a man
given to appetite.

23:3 Be not desirous of his dainties: for they are deceitful meat.

23:4 Labour not to be rich: cease from thine own wisdom.

23:5 Wilt thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? for riches
certainly make themselves wings; they fly away as an eagle toward
heaven.

23:6 Eat thou not the bread of him that hath an evil eye, neither
desire thou his dainty meats: 23:7 For as he thinketh in his heart, so
is he: Eat and drink, saith he to thee; but his heart is not with
thee.

23:8 The morsel which thou hast eaten shalt thou vomit up, and lose
thy sweet words.

23:9 Speak not in the ears of a fool: for he will despise the wisdom
of thy words.

23:10 Remove not the old landmark; and enter not into the fields of
the fatherless: 23:11 For their redeemer is mighty; he shall plead
their cause with thee.

23:12 Apply thine heart unto instruction, and thine ears to the words
of knowledge.

23:13 Withhold not correction from the child: for if thou beatest him
with the rod, he shall not die.

23:14 Thou shalt beat him with the rod, and shalt deliver his soul
from hell.

23:15 My son, if thine heart be wise, my heart shall rejoice, even
mine.

23:16 Yea, my reins shall rejoice, when thy lips speak right things.

23:17 Let not thine heart envy sinners: but be thou in the fear of the
LORD all the day long.

23:18 For surely there is an end; and thine expectation shall not be
cut off.

23:19 Hear thou, my son, and be wise, and guide thine heart in the
way.

23:20 Be not among winebibbers; among riotous eaters of flesh: 23:21
For the drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty: and drowsiness
shall clothe a man with rags.

23:22 Hearken unto thy father that begat thee, and despise not thy
mother when she is old.

23:23 Buy the truth, and sell it not; also wisdom, and instruction,
and understanding.

23:24 The father of the righteous shall greatly rejoice: and he that
begetteth a wise child shall have joy of him.

23:25 Thy father and thy mother shall be glad, and she that bare thee
shall rejoice.

23:26 My son, give me thine heart, and let thine eyes observe my ways.

23:27 For a whore is a deep ditch; and a strange woman is a narrow
pit.

23:28 She also lieth in wait as for a prey, and increaseth the
transgressors among men.

23:29 Who hath woe? who hath sorrow? who hath contentions? who hath
babbling? who hath wounds without cause? who hath redness of eyes?
23:30 They that tarry long at the wine; they that go to seek mixed
wine.

23:31 Look not thou upon the wine when it is red, when it giveth his
colour in the cup, when it moveth itself aright.

23:32 At the last it biteth like a serpent, and stingeth like an
adder.

23:33 Thine eyes shall behold strange women, and thine heart shall
utter perverse things.

23:34 Yea, thou shalt be as he that lieth down in the midst of the
sea, or as he that lieth upon the top of a mast.

23:35 They have stricken me, shalt thou say, and I was not sick; they
have beaten me, and I felt it not: when shall I awake? I will seek it
yet again.

24:1 Be not thou envious against evil men, neither desire to be with
them.

24:2 For their heart studieth destruction, and their lips talk of
mischief.

24:3 Through wisdom is an house builded; and by understanding it is
established: 24:4 And by knowledge shall the chambers be filled with
all precious and pleasant riches.

24:5 A wise man is strong; yea, a man of knowledge increaseth
strength.

24:6 For by wise counsel thou shalt make thy war: and in multitude of
counsellors there is safety.

24:7 Wisdom is too high for a fool: he openeth not his mouth in the
gate.

24:8 He that deviseth to do evil shall be called a mischievous person.

24:9 The thought of foolishness is sin: and the scorner is an
abomination to men.

24:10 If thou faint in the day of adversity, thy strength is small.

24:11 If thou forbear to deliver them that are drawn unto death, and
those that are ready to be slain; 24:12 If thou sayest, Behold, we
knew it not; doth not he that pondereth the heart consider it? and he
that keepeth thy soul, doth not he know it? and shall not he render to
every man according to his works?  24:13 My son, eat thou honey,
because it is good; and the honeycomb, which is sweet to thy taste:
24:14 So shall the knowledge of wisdom be unto thy soul: when thou
hast found it, then there shall be a reward, and thy expectation shall
not be cut off.

24:15 Lay not wait, O wicked man, against the dwelling of the
righteous; spoil not his resting place: 24:16 For a just man falleth
seven times, and riseth up again: but the wicked shall fall into
mischief.

24:17 Rejoice not when thine enemy falleth, and let not thine heart be
glad when he stumbleth: 24:18 Lest the LORD see it, and it displease
him, and he turn away his wrath from him.

24:19 Fret not thyself because of evil men, neither be thou envious at
the wicked: 24:20 For there shall be no reward to the evil man; the
candle of the wicked shall be put out.

24:21 My son, fear thou the LORD and the king: and meddle not with
them that are given to change: 24:22 For their calamity shall rise
suddenly; and who knoweth the ruin of them both?  24:23 These things
also belong to the wise. It is not good to have respect of persons in
judgment.

24:24 He that saith unto the wicked, Thou are righteous; him shall the
people curse, nations shall abhor him: 24:25 But to them that rebuke
him shall be delight, and a good blessing shall come upon them.

24:26 Every man shall kiss his lips that giveth a right answer.

24:27 Prepare thy work without, and make it fit for thyself in the
field; and afterwards build thine house.

24:28 Be not a witness against thy neighbour without cause; and
deceive not with thy lips.

24:29 Say not, I will do so to him as he hath done to me: I will
render to the man according to his work.

24:30 I went by the field of the slothful, and by the vineyard of the
man void of understanding; 24:31 And, lo, it was all grown over with
thorns, and nettles had covered the face thereof, and the stone wall
thereof was broken down.

24:32 Then I saw, and considered it well: I looked upon it, and
received instruction.

24:33 Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the
hands to sleep: 24:34 So shall thy poverty come as one that
travelleth; and thy want as an armed man.

25:1 These are also proverbs of Solomon, which the men of Hezekiah
king of Judah copied out.

25:2 It is the glory of God to conceal a thing: but the honour of
kings is to search out a matter.

25:3 The heaven for height, and the earth for depth, and the heart of
kings is unsearchable.

25:4 Take away the dross from the silver, and there shall come forth a
vessel for the finer.

25:5 Take away the wicked from before the king, and his throne shall
be established in righteousness.

25:6 Put not forth thyself in the presence of the king, and stand not
in the place of great men: 25:7 For better it is that it be said unto
thee, Come up hither; than that thou shouldest be put lower in the
presence of the prince whom thine eyes have seen.

25:8 Go not forth hastily to strive, lest thou know not what to do in
the end thereof, when thy neighbour hath put thee to shame.

25:9 Debate thy cause with thy neighbour himself; and discover not a
secret to another: 25:10 Lest he that heareth it put thee to shame,
and thine infamy turn not away.

25:11 A word fitly spoken is like apples of gold in pictures of
silver.

25:12 As an earring of gold, and an ornament of fine gold, so is a
wise reprover upon an obedient ear.

25:13 As the cold of snow in the time of harvest, so is a faithful
messenger to them that send him: for he refresheth the soul of his
masters.

25:14 Whoso boasteth himself of a false gift is like clouds and wind
without rain.

25:15 By long forbearing is a prince persuaded, and a soft tongue
breaketh the bone.

25:16 Hast thou found honey? eat so much as is sufficient for thee,
lest thou be filled therewith, and vomit it.

25:17 Withdraw thy foot from thy neighbour's house; lest he be weary
of thee, and so hate thee.

25:18 A man that beareth false witness against his neighbour is a
maul, and a sword, and a sharp arrow.

25:19 Confidence in an unfaithful man in time of trouble is like a
broken tooth, and a foot out of joint.

25:20 As he that taketh away a garment in cold weather, and as vinegar
upon nitre, so is he that singeth songs to an heavy heart.

25:21 If thine enemy be hungry, give him bread to eat; and if he be
thirsty, give him water to drink: 25:22 For thou shalt heap coals of
fire upon his head, and the LORD shall reward thee.

25:23 The north wind driveth away rain: so doth an angry countenance a
backbiting tongue.

25:24 It is better to dwell in the corner of the housetop, than with a
brawling woman and in a wide house.

25:25 As cold waters to a thirsty soul, so is good news from a far
country.

25:26 A righteous man falling down before the wicked is as a troubled
fountain, and a corrupt spring.

25:27 It is not good to eat much honey: so for men to search their own
glory is not glory.

25:28 He that hath no rule over his own spirit is like a city that is
broken down, and without walls.

26:1 As snow in summer, and as rain in harvest, so honour is not
seemly for a fool.

26:2 As the bird by wandering, as the swallow by flying, so the curse
causeless shall not come.

26:3 A whip for the horse, a bridle for the ass, and a rod for the
fool's back.

26:4 Answer not a fool according to his folly, lest thou also be like
unto him.

26:5 Answer a fool according to his folly, lest he be wise in his own
conceit.

26:6 He that sendeth a message by the hand of a fool cutteth off the
feet, and drinketh damage.

26:7 The legs of the lame are not equal: so is a parable in the mouth
of fools.

26:8 As he that bindeth a stone in a sling, so is he that giveth
honour to a fool.

26:9 As a thorn goeth up into the hand of a drunkard, so is a parable
in the mouths of fools.

26:10 The great God that formed all things both rewardeth the fool,
and rewardeth transgressors.

26:11 As a dog returneth to his vomit, so a fool returneth to his
folly.

26:12 Seest thou a man wise in his own conceit? there is more hope of
a fool than of him.

26:13 The slothful man saith, There is a lion in the way; a lion is in
the streets.

26:14 As the door turneth upon his hinges, so doth the slothful upon
his bed.

26:15 The slothful hideth his hand in his bosom; it grieveth him to
bring it again to his mouth.

26:16 The sluggard is wiser in his own conceit than seven men that can
render a reason.

26:17 He that passeth by, and meddleth with strife belonging not to
him, is like one that taketh a dog by the ears.

26:18 As a mad man who casteth firebrands, arrows, and death, 26:19 So
is the man that deceiveth his neighbour, and saith, Am not I in sport?
26:20 Where no wood is, there the fire goeth out: so where there is no
talebearer, the strife ceaseth.

26:21 As coals are to burning coals, and wood to fire; so is a
contentious man to kindle strife.

26:22 The words of a talebearer are as wounds, and they go down into
the innermost parts of the belly.

26:23 Burning lips and a wicked heart are like a potsherd covered with
silver dross.

26:24 He that hateth dissembleth with his lips, and layeth up deceit
within him; 26:25 When he speaketh fair, believe him not: for there
are seven abominations in his heart.

26:26 Whose hatred is covered by deceit, his wickedness shall be
shewed before the whole congregation.

26:27 Whoso diggeth a pit shall fall therein: and he that rolleth a
stone, it will return upon him.

26:28 A lying tongue hateth those that are afflicted by it; and a
flattering mouth worketh ruin.

27:1 Boast not thyself of to morrow; for thou knowest not what a day
may bring forth.

27:2 Let another man praise thee, and not thine own mouth; a stranger,
and not thine own lips.

27:3 A stone is heavy, and the sand weighty; but a fool's wrath is
heavier than them both.

27:4 Wrath is cruel, and anger is outrageous; but who is able to stand
before envy?  27:5 Open rebuke is better than secret love.

27:6 Faithful are the wounds of a friend; but the kisses of an enemy
are deceitful.

27:7 The full soul loatheth an honeycomb; but to the hungry soul every
bitter thing is sweet.

27:8 As a bird that wandereth from her nest, so is a man that
wandereth from his place.

27:9 Ointment and perfume rejoice the heart: so doth the sweetness of
a man's friend by hearty counsel.

27:10 Thine own friend, and thy father's friend, forsake not; neither
go into thy brother's house in the day of thy calamity: for better is
a neighbour that is near than a brother far off.

27:11 My son, be wise, and make my heart glad, that I may answer him
that reproacheth me.

27:12 A prudent man foreseeth the evil, and hideth himself; but the
simple pass on, and are punished.

27:13 Take his garment that is surety for a stranger, and take a
pledge of him for a strange woman.

27:14 He that blesseth his friend with a loud voice, rising early in
the morning, it shall be counted a curse to him.

27:15 A continual dropping in a very rainy day and a contentious woman
are alike.

27:16 Whosoever hideth her hideth the wind, and the ointment of his
right hand, which bewrayeth itself.

27:17 Iron sharpeneth iron; so a man sharpeneth the countenance of his
friend.

27:18 Whoso keepeth the fig tree shall eat the fruit thereof: so he
that waiteth on his master shall be honoured.

27:19 As in water face answereth to face, so the heart of man to man.

27:20 Hell and destruction are never full; so the eyes of man are
never satisfied.

27:21 As the fining pot for silver, and the furnace for gold; so is a
man to his praise.

27:22 Though thou shouldest bray a fool in a mortar among wheat with a
pestle, yet will not his foolishness depart from him.

27:23 Be thou diligent to know the state of thy flocks, and look well
to thy herds.

27:24 For riches are not for ever: and doth the crown endure to every
generation?  27:25 The hay appeareth, and the tender grass sheweth
itself, and herbs of the mountains are gathered.

27:26 The lambs are for thy clothing, and the goats are the price of
the field.

27:27 And thou shalt have goats' milk enough for thy food, for the
food of thy household, and for the maintenance for thy maidens.

28:1 The wicked flee when no man pursueth: but the righteous are bold
as a lion.

28:2 For the transgression of a land many are the princes thereof: but
by a man of understanding and knowledge the state thereof shall be
prolonged.

28:3 A poor man that oppresseth the poor is like a sweeping rain which
leaveth no food.

28:4 They that forsake the law praise the wicked: but such as keep the
law contend with them.

28:5 Evil men understand not judgment: but they that seek the LORD
understand all things.

28:6 Better is the poor that walketh in his uprightness, than he that
is perverse in his ways, though he be rich.

28:7 Whoso keepeth the law is a wise son: but he that is a companion
of riotous men shameth his father.

28:8 He that by usury and unjust gain increaseth his substance, he
shall gather it for him that will pity the poor.

28:9 He that turneth away his ear from hearing the law, even his
prayer shall be abomination.

28:10 Whoso causeth the righteous to go astray in an evil way, he
shall fall himself into his own pit: but the upright shall have good
things in possession.

28:11 The rich man is wise in his own conceit; but the poor that hath
understanding searcheth him out.

28:12 When righteous men do rejoice, there is great glory: but when
the wicked rise, a man is hidden.

28:13 He that covereth his sins shall not prosper: but whoso
confesseth and forsaketh them shall have mercy.

28:14 Happy is the man that feareth alway: but he that hardeneth his
heart shall fall into mischief.

28:15 As a roaring lion, and a ranging bear; so is a wicked ruler over
the poor people.

28:16 The prince that wanteth understanding is also a great oppressor:
but he that hateth covetousness shall prolong his days.

28:17 A man that doeth violence to the blood of any person shall flee
to the pit; let no man stay him.

28:18 Whoso walketh uprightly shall be saved: but he that is perverse
in his ways shall fall at once.

28:19 He that tilleth his land shall have plenty of bread: but he that
followeth after vain persons shall have poverty enough.

28:20 A faithful man shall abound with blessings: but he that maketh
haste to be rich shall not be innocent.

28:21 To have respect of persons is not good: for for a piece of bread
that man will transgress.

28:22 He that hasteth to be rich hath an evil eye, and considereth not
that poverty shall come upon him.

28:23 He that rebuketh a man afterwards shall find more favour than he
that flattereth with the tongue.

28:24 Whoso robbeth his father or his mother, and saith, It is no
transgression; the same is the companion of a destroyer.

28:25 He that is of a proud heart stirreth up strife: but he that
putteth his trust in the LORD shall be made fat.

28:26 He that trusteth in his own heart is a fool: but whoso walketh
wisely, he shall be delivered.

28:27 He that giveth unto the poor shall not lack: but he that hideth
his eyes shall have many a curse.

28:28 When the wicked rise, men hide themselves: but when they perish,
the righteous increase.

29:1 He, that being often reproved hardeneth his neck, shall suddenly
be destroyed, and that without remedy.

29:2 When the righteous are in authority, the people rejoice: but when
the wicked beareth rule, the people mourn.

29:3 Whoso loveth wisdom rejoiceth his father: but he that keepeth
company with harlots spendeth his substance.

29:4 The king by judgment establisheth the land: but he that receiveth
gifts overthroweth it.

29:5 A man that flattereth his neighbour spreadeth a net for his feet.

29:6 In the transgression of an evil man there is a snare: but the
righteous doth sing and rejoice.

29:7 The righteous considereth the cause of the poor: but the wicked
regardeth not to know it.

29:8 Scornful men bring a city into a snare: but wise men turn away
wrath.

29:9 If a wise man contendeth with a foolish man, whether he rage or
laugh, there is no rest.

29:10 The bloodthirsty hate the upright: but the just seek his soul.

29:11 A fool uttereth all his mind: but a wise man keepeth it in till
afterwards.

29:12 If a ruler hearken to lies, all his servants are wicked.

29:13 The poor and the deceitful man meet together: the LORD
lighteneth both their eyes.

29:14 The king that faithfully judgeth the poor, his throne shall be
established for ever.

29:15 The rod and reproof give wisdom: but a child left to himself
bringeth his mother to shame.

29:16 When the wicked are multiplied, transgression increaseth: but
the righteous shall see their fall.

29:17 Correct thy son, and he shall give thee rest; yea, he shall give
delight unto thy soul.

29:18 Where there is no vision, the people perish: but he that keepeth
the law, happy is he.

29:19 A servant will not be corrected by words: for though he
understand he will not answer.

29:20 Seest thou a man that is hasty in his words? there is more hope
of a fool than of him.

29:21 He that delicately bringeth up his servant from a child shall
have him become his son at the length.

29:22 An angry man stirreth up strife, and a furious man aboundeth in
transgression.

29:23 A man's pride shall bring him low: but honour shall uphold the
humble in spirit.

29:24 Whoso is partner with a thief hateth his own soul: he heareth
cursing, and bewrayeth it not.

29:25 The fear of man bringeth a snare: but whoso putteth his trust in
the LORD shall be safe.

29:26 Many seek the ruler's favour; but every man's judgment cometh
from the LORD.

29:27 An unjust man is an abomination to the just: and he that is
upright in the way is abomination to the wicked.

30:1 The words of Agur the son of Jakeh, even the prophecy: the man
spake unto Ithiel, even unto Ithiel and Ucal, 30:2 Surely I am more
brutish than any man, and have not the understanding of a man.

30:3 I neither learned wisdom, nor have the knowledge of the holy.

30:4 Who hath ascended up into heaven, or descended? who hath gathered
the wind in his fists? who hath bound the waters in a garment? who
hath established all the ends of the earth? what is his name, and what
is his son's name, if thou canst tell?  30:5 Every word of God is
pure: he is a shield unto them that put their trust in him.

30:6 Add thou not unto his words, lest he reprove thee, and thou be
found a liar.

30:7 Two things have I required of thee; deny me them not before I
die: 30:8 Remove far from me vanity and lies: give me neither poverty
nor riches; feed me with food convenient for me: 30:9 Lest I be full,
and deny thee, and say, Who is the LORD? or lest I be poor, and steal,
and take the name of my God in vain.

30:10 Accuse not a servant unto his master, lest he curse thee, and
thou be found guilty.

30:11 There is a generation that curseth their father, and doth not
bless their mother.

30:12 There is a generation that are pure in their own eyes, and yet
is not washed from their filthiness.

30:13 There is a generation, O how lofty are their eyes! and their
eyelids are lifted up.

30:14 There is a generation, whose teeth are as swords, and their jaw
teeth as knives, to devour the poor from off the earth, and the needy
from among men.

30:15 The horseleach hath two daughters, crying, Give, give. There are
three things that are never satisfied, yea, four things say not, It is
enough: 30:16 The grave; and the barren womb; the earth that is not
filled with water; and the fire that saith not, It is enough.

30:17 The eye that mocketh at his father, and despiseth to obey his
mother, the ravens of the valley shall pick it out, and the young
eagles shall eat it.

30:18 There be three things which are too wonderful for me, yea, four
which I know not: 30:19 The way of an eagle in the air; the way of a
serpent upon a rock; the way of a ship in the midst of the sea; and
the way of a man with a maid.

30:20 Such is the way of an adulterous woman; she eateth, and wipeth
her mouth, and saith, I have done no wickedness.

30:21 For three things the earth is disquieted, and for four which it
cannot bear: 30:22 For a servant when he reigneth; and a fool when he
is filled with meat; 30:23 For an odious woman when she is married;
and an handmaid that is heir to her mistress.

30:24 There be four things which are little upon the earth, but they
are exceeding wise: 30:25 The ants are a people not strong, yet they
prepare their meat in the summer; 30:26 The conies are but a feeble
folk, yet make they their houses in the rocks; 30:27 The locusts have
no king, yet go they forth all of them by bands; 30:28 The spider
taketh hold with her hands, and is in kings' palaces.

30:29 There be three things which go well, yea, four are comely in
going: 30:30 A lion which is strongest among beasts, and turneth not
away for any; 30:31 A greyhound; an he goat also; and a king, against
whom there is no rising up.

30:32 If thou hast done foolishly in lifting up thyself, or if thou
hast thought evil, lay thine hand upon thy mouth.

30:33 Surely the churning of milk bringeth forth butter, and the
wringing of the nose bringeth forth blood: so the forcing of wrath
bringeth forth strife.

31:1 The words of king Lemuel, the prophecy that his mother taught
him.

31:2 What, my son? and what, the son of my womb? and what, the son of
my vows?  31:3 Give not thy strength unto women, nor thy ways to that
which destroyeth kings.

31:4 It is not for kings, O Lemuel, it is not for kings to drink wine;
nor for princes strong drink: 31:5 Lest they drink, and forget the
law, and pervert the judgment of any of the afflicted.

31:6 Give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish, and wine unto
those that be of heavy hearts.

31:7 Let him drink, and forget his poverty, and remember his misery no
more.

31:8 Open thy mouth for the dumb in the cause of all such as are
appointed to destruction.

31:9 Open thy mouth, judge righteously, and plead the cause of the
poor and needy.

31:10 Who can find a virtuous woman? for her price is far above
rubies.

31:11 The heart of her husband doth safely trust in her, so that he
shall have no need of spoil.

31:12 She will do him good and not evil all the days of her life.

31:13 She seeketh wool, and flax, and worketh willingly with her
hands.

31:14 She is like the merchants' ships; she bringeth her food from
afar.

31:15 She riseth also while it is yet night, and giveth meat to her
household, and a portion to her maidens.

31:16 She considereth a field, and buyeth it: with the fruit of her
hands she planteth a vineyard.

31:17 She girdeth her loins with strength, and strengtheneth her arms.

31:18 She perceiveth that her merchandise is good: her candle goeth
not out by night.

31:19 She layeth her hands to the spindle, and her hands hold the
distaff.

31:20 She stretcheth out her hand to the poor; yea, she reacheth forth
her hands to the needy.

31:21 She is not afraid of the snow for her household: for all her
household are clothed with scarlet.

31:22 She maketh herself coverings of tapestry; her clothing is silk
and purple.

31:23 Her husband is known in the gates, when he sitteth among the
elders of the land.

31:24 She maketh fine linen, and selleth it; and delivereth girdles
unto the merchant.

31:25 Strength and honour are her clothing; and she shall rejoice in
time to come.

31:26 She openeth her mouth with wisdom; and in her tongue is the law
of kindness.

31:27 She looketh well to the ways of her household, and eateth not
the bread of idleness.

31:28 Her children arise up, and call her blessed; her husband also,
and he praiseth her.

31:29 Many daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them
all.

31:30 Favour is deceitful, and beauty is vain: but a woman that
feareth the LORD, she shall be praised.

31:31 Give her of the fruit of her hands; and let her own works praise
her in the gates.




Ecclesiastes

or

The Preacher


1:1 The words of the Preacher, the son of David, king in Jerusalem.

1:2 Vanity of vanities, saith the Preacher, vanity of vanities; all is
vanity.

1:3 What profit hath a man of all his labour which he taketh under the
sun?  1:4 One generation passeth away, and another generation cometh:
but the earth abideth for ever.

1:5 The sun also ariseth, and the sun goeth down, and hasteth to his
place where he arose.

1:6 The wind goeth toward the south, and turneth about unto the north;
it whirleth about continually, and the wind returneth again according
to his circuits.

1:7 All the rivers run into the sea; yet the sea is not full; unto the
place from whence the rivers come, thither they return again.

1:8 All things are full of labour; man cannot utter it: the eye is not
satisfied with seeing, nor the ear filled with hearing.

1:9 The thing that hath been, it is that which shall be; and that
which is done is that which shall be done: and there is no new thing
under the sun.

1:10 Is there any thing whereof it may be said, See, this is new? it
hath been already of old time, which was before us.

1:11 There is no remembrance of former things; neither shall there be
any remembrance of things that are to come with those that shall come
after.

1:12 I the Preacher was king over Israel in Jerusalem.

1:13 And I gave my heart to seek and search out by wisdom concerning
all things that are done under heaven: this sore travail hath God
given to the sons of man to be exercised therewith.

1:14 I have seen all the works that are done under the sun; and,
behold, all is vanity and vexation of spirit.

1:15 That which is crooked cannot be made straight: and that which is
wanting cannot be numbered.

1:16 I communed with mine own heart, saying, Lo, I am come to great
estate, and have gotten more wisdom than all they that have been
before me in Jerusalem: yea, my heart had great experience of wisdom
and knowledge.

1:17 And I gave my heart to know wisdom, and to know madness and
folly: I perceived that this also is vexation of spirit.

1:18 For in much wisdom is much grief: and he that increaseth
knowledge increaseth sorrow.

2:1 I said in mine heart, Go to now, I will prove thee with mirth,
therefore enjoy pleasure: and, behold, this also is vanity.

2:2 I said of laughter, It is mad: and of mirth, What doeth it?  2:3 I
sought in mine heart to give myself unto wine, yet acquainting mine
heart with wisdom; and to lay hold on folly, till I might see what was
that good for the sons of men, which they should do under the heaven
all the days of their life.

2:4 I made me great works; I builded me houses; I planted me
vineyards: 2:5 I made me gardens and orchards, and I planted trees in
them of all kind of fruits: 2:6 I made me pools of water, to water
therewith the wood that bringeth forth trees: 2:7 I got me servants
and maidens, and had servants born in my house; also I had great
possessions of great and small cattle above all that were in Jerusalem
before me: 2:8 I gathered me also silver and gold, and the peculiar
treasure of kings and of the provinces: I gat me men singers and women
singers, and the delights of the sons of men, as musical instruments,
and that of all sorts.

2:9 So I was great, and increased more than all that were before me in
Jerusalem: also my wisdom remained with me.

2:10 And whatsoever mine eyes desired I kept not from them, I withheld
not my heart from any joy; for my heart rejoiced in all my labour: and
this was my portion of all my labour.

2:11 Then I looked on all the works that my hands had wrought, and on
the labour that I had laboured to do: and, behold, all was vanity and
vexation of spirit, and there was no profit under the sun.

2:12 And I turned myself to behold wisdom, and madness, and folly: for
what can the man do that cometh after the king? even that which hath
been already done.

2:13 Then I saw that wisdom excelleth folly, as far as light excelleth
darkness.

2:14 The wise man's eyes are in his head; but the fool walketh in
darkness: and I myself perceived also that one event happeneth to them
all.

2:15 Then said I in my heart, As it happeneth to the fool, so it
happeneth even to me; and why was I then more wise? Then I said in my
heart, that this also is vanity.

2:16 For there is no remembrance of the wise more than of the fool for
ever; seeing that which now is in the days to come shall all be
forgotten.

And how dieth the wise man? as the fool.

2:17 Therefore I hated life; because the work that is wrought under
the sun is grievous unto me: for all is vanity and vexation of spirit.

2:18 Yea, I hated all my labour which I had taken under the sun:
because I should leave it unto the man that shall be after me.

2:19 And who knoweth whether he shall be a wise man or a fool? yet
shall he have rule over all my labour wherein I have laboured, and
wherein I have shewed myself wise under the sun. This is also vanity.

2:20 Therefore I went about to cause my heart to despair of all the
labour which I took under the sun.

2:21 For there is a man whose labour is in wisdom, and in knowledge,
and in equity; yet to a man that hath not laboured therein shall he
leave it for his portion. This also is vanity and a great evil.

2:22 For what hath man of all his labour, and of the vexation of his
heart, wherein he hath laboured under the sun?  2:23 For all his days
are sorrows, and his travail grief; yea, his heart taketh not rest in
the night. This is also vanity.

2:24 There is nothing better for a man, than that he should eat and
drink, and that he should make his soul enjoy good in his labour. This
also I saw, that it was from the hand of God.

2:25 For who can eat, or who else can hasten hereunto, more than I?
2:26 For God giveth to a man that is good in his sight wisdom, and
knowledge, and joy: but to the sinner he giveth travail, to gather and
to heap up, that he may give to him that is good before God. This also
is vanity and vexation of spirit.

3:1 To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose
under the heaven: 3:2 A time to be born, and a time to die; a time to
plant, and a time to pluck up that which is planted; 3:3 A time to
kill, and a time to heal; a time to break down, and a time to build
up; 3:4 A time to weep, and a time to laugh; a time to mourn, and a
time to dance; 3:5 A time to cast away stones, and a time to gather
stones together; a time to embrace, and a time to refrain from
embracing; 3:6 A time to get, and a time to lose; a time to keep, and
a time to cast away; 3:7 A time to rend, and a time to sew; a time to
keep silence, and a time to speak; 3:8 A time to love, and a time to
hate; a time of war, and a time of peace.

3:9 What profit hath he that worketh in that wherein he laboureth?
3:10 I have seen the travail, which God hath given to the sons of men
to be exercised in it.

3:11 He hath made every thing beautiful in his time: also he hath set
the world in their heart, so that no man can find out the work that
God maketh from the beginning to the end.

3:12 I know that there is no good in them, but for a man to rejoice,
and to do good in his life.

3:13 And also that every man should eat and drink, and enjoy the good
of all his labour, it is the gift of God.

3:14 I know that, whatsoever God doeth, it shall be for ever: nothing
can be put to it, nor any thing taken from it: and God doeth it, that
men should fear before him.

3:15 That which hath been is now; and that which is to be hath already
been; and God requireth that which is past.

3:16 And moreover I saw under the sun the place of judgment, that
wickedness was there; and the place of righteousness, that iniquity
was there.

3:17 I said in mine heart, God shall judge the righteous and the
wicked: for there is a time there for every purpose and for every
work.

3:18 I said in mine heart concerning the estate of the sons of men,
that God might manifest them, and that they might see that they
themselves are beasts.

3:19 For that which befalleth the sons of men befalleth beasts; even
one thing befalleth them: as the one dieth, so dieth the other; yea,
they have all one breath; so that a man hath no preeminence above a
beast: for all is vanity.

3:20 All go unto one place; all are of the dust, and all turn to dust
again.

3:21 Who knoweth the spirit of man that goeth upward, and the spirit
of the beast that goeth downward to the earth?  3:22 Wherefore I
perceive that there is nothing better, than that a man should rejoice
in his own works; for that is his portion: for who shall bring him to
see what shall be after him?  4:1 So I returned, and considered all
the oppressions that are done under the sun: and behold the tears of
such as were oppressed, and they had no comforter; and on the side of
their oppressors there was power; but they had no comforter.

4:2 Wherefore I praised the dead which are already dead more than the
living which are yet alive.

4:3 Yea, better is he than both they, which hath not yet been, who
hath not seen the evil work that is done under the sun.

4:4 Again, I considered all travail, and every right work, that for
this a man is envied of his neighbour. This is also vanity and
vexation of spirit.

4:5 The fool foldeth his hands together, and eateth his own flesh.

4:6 Better is an handful with quietness, than both the hands full with
travail and vexation of spirit.

4:7 Then I returned, and I saw vanity under the sun.

4:8 There is one alone, and there is not a second; yea, he hath
neither child nor brother: yet is there no end of all his labour;
neither is his eye satisfied with riches; neither saith he, For whom
do I labour, and bereave my soul of good? This is also vanity, yea, it
is a sore travail.

4:9 Two are better than one; because they have a good reward for their
labour.

4:10 For if they fall, the one will lift up his fellow: but woe to him
that is alone when he falleth; for he hath not another to help him up.

4:11 Again, if two lie together, then they have heat: but how can one
be warm alone?  4:12 And if one prevail against him, two shall
withstand him; and a threefold cord is not quickly broken.

4:13 Better is a poor and a wise child than an old and foolish king,
who will no more be admonished.

4:14 For out of prison he cometh to reign; whereas also he that is
born in his kingdom becometh poor.

4:15 I considered all the living which walk under the sun, with the
second child that shall stand up in his stead.

4:16 There is no end of all the people, even of all that have been
before them: they also that come after shall not rejoice in him.
Surely this also is vanity and vexation of spirit.

5:1 Keep thy foot when thou goest to the house of God, and be more
ready to hear, than to give the sacrifice of fools: for they consider
not that they do evil.

5:2 Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to
utter any thing before God: for God is in heaven, and thou upon earth:
therefore let thy words be few.

5:3 For a dream cometh through the multitude of business; and a fool's
voice is known by multitude of words.

5:4 When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it; for he hath
no pleasure in fools: pay that which thou hast vowed.

5:5 Better is it that thou shouldest not vow, than that thou shouldest
vow and not pay.

5:6 Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin; neither say thou
before the angel, that it was an error: wherefore should God be angry
at thy voice, and destroy the work of thine hands?  5:7 For in the
multitude of dreams and many words there are also divers vanities: but
fear thou God.

5:8 If thou seest the oppression of the poor, and violent perverting
of judgment and justice in a province, marvel not at the matter: for
he that is higher than the highest regardeth; and there be higher than
they.

5:9 Moreover the profit of the earth is for all: the king himself is
served by the field.

5:10 He that loveth silver shall not be satisfied with silver; nor he
that loveth abundance with increase: this is also vanity.

5:11 When goods increase, they are increased that eat them: and what
good is there to the owners thereof, saving the beholding of them with
their eyes?  5:12 The sleep of a labouring man is sweet, whether he
eat little or much: but the abundance of the rich will not suffer him
to sleep.

5:13 There is a sore evil which I have seen under the sun, namely,
riches kept for the owners thereof to their hurt.

5:14 But those riches perish by evil travail: and he begetteth a son,
and there is nothing in his hand.

5:15 As he came forth of his mother's womb, naked shall he return to
go as he came, and shall take nothing of his labour, which he may
carry away in his hand.

5:16 And this also is a sore evil, that in all points as he came, so
shall he go: and what profit hath he that hath laboured for the wind?
5:17 All his days also he eateth in darkness, and he hath much sorrow
and wrath with his sickness.

5:18 Behold that which I have seen: it is good and comely for one to
eat and to drink, and to enjoy the good of all his labour that he
taketh under the sun all the days of his life, which God giveth him:
for it is his portion.

5:19 Every man also to whom God hath given riches and wealth, and hath
given him power to eat thereof, and to take his portion, and to
rejoice in his labour; this is the gift of God.

5:20 For he shall not much remember the days of his life; because God
answereth him in the joy of his heart.

6:1 There is an evil which I have seen under the sun, and it is common
among men: 6:2 A man to whom God hath given riches, wealth, and
honour, so that he wanteth nothing for his soul of all that he
desireth, yet God giveth him not power to eat thereof, but a stranger
eateth it: this is vanity, and it is an evil disease.

6:3 If a man beget an hundred children, and live many years, so that
the days of his years be many, and his soul be not filled with good,
and also that he have no burial; I say, that an untimely birth is
better than he.

6:4 For he cometh in with vanity, and departeth in darkness, and his
name shall be covered with darkness.

6:5 Moreover he hath not seen the sun, nor known any thing: this hath
more rest than the other.

6:6 Yea, though he live a thousand years twice told, yet hath he seen
no good: do not all go to one place?  6:7 All the labour of man is for
his mouth, and yet the appetite is not filled.

6:8 For what hath the wise more than the fool? what hath the poor,
that knoweth to walk before the living?  6:9 Better is the sight of
the eyes than the wandering of the desire: this is also vanity and
vexation of spirit.

6:10 That which hath been is named already, and it is known that it is
man: neither may he contend with him that is mightier than he.

6:11 Seeing there be many things that increase vanity, what is man the
better?  6:12 For who knoweth what is good for man in this life, all
the days of his vain life which he spendeth as a shadow? for who can
tell a man what shall be after him under the sun?  7:1 A good name is
better than precious ointment; and the day of death than the day of
one's birth.

7:2 It is better to go to the house of mourning, than to go to the
house of feasting: for that is the end of all men; and the living will
lay it to his heart.

7:3 Sorrow is better than laughter: for by the sadness of the
countenance the heart is made better.

7:4 The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning; but the heart
of fools is in the house of mirth.

7:5 It is better to hear the rebuke of the wise, than for a man to
hear the song of fools.

7:6 For as the crackling of thorns under a pot, so is the laughter of
the fool: this also is vanity.

7:7 Surely oppression maketh a wise man mad; and a gift destroyeth the
heart.

7:8 Better is the end of a thing than the beginning thereof: and the
patient in spirit is better than the proud in spirit.

7:9 Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry: for anger resteth in the
bosom of fools.

7:10 Say not thou, What is the cause that the former days were better
than these? for thou dost not enquire wisely concerning this.

7:11 Wisdom is good with an inheritance: and by it there is profit to
them that see the sun.

7:12 For wisdom is a defence, and money is a defence: but the
excellency of knowledge is, that wisdom giveth life to them that have
it.

7:13 Consider the work of God: for who can make that straight, which
he hath made crooked?  7:14 In the day of prosperity be joyful, but in
the day of adversity consider: God also hath set the one over against
the other, to the end that man should find nothing after him.

7:15 All things have I seen in the days of my vanity: there is a just
man that perisheth in his righteousness, and there is a wicked man
that prolongeth his life in his wickedness.

7:16 Be not righteous over much; neither make thyself over wise: why
shouldest thou destroy thyself ?  7:17 Be not over much wicked,
neither be thou foolish: why shouldest thou die before thy time?  7:18
It is good that thou shouldest take hold of this; yea, also from this
withdraw not thine hand: for he that feareth God shall come forth of
them all.

7:19 Wisdom strengtheneth the wise more than ten mighty men which are
in the city.

7:20 For there is not a just man upon earth, that doeth good, and
sinneth not.

7:21 Also take no heed unto all words that are spoken; lest thou hear
thy servant curse thee: 7:22 For oftentimes also thine own heart
knoweth that thou thyself likewise hast cursed others.

7:23 All this have I proved by wisdom: I said, I will be wise; but it
was far from me.

7:24 That which is far off, and exceeding deep, who can find it out?
7:25 I applied mine heart to know, and to search, and to seek out
wisdom, and the reason of things, and to know the wickedness of folly,
even of foolishness and madness: 7:26 And I find more bitter than
death the woman, whose heart is snares and nets, and her hands as
bands: whoso pleaseth God shall escape from her; but the sinner shall
be taken by her.

7:27 Behold, this have I found, saith the preacher, counting one by
one, to find out the account: 7:28 Which yet my soul seeketh, but I
find not: one man among a thousand have I found; but a woman among all
those have I not found.

7:29 Lo, this only have I found, that God hath made man upright; but
they have sought out many inventions.

8:1 Who is as the wise man? and who knoweth the interpretation of a
thing?  a man's wisdom maketh his face to shine, and the boldness of
his face shall be changed.

8:2 I counsel thee to keep the king's commandment, and that in regard
of the oath of God.

8:3 Be not hasty to go out of his sight: stand not in an evil thing;
for he doeth whatsoever pleaseth him.

8:4 Where the word of a king is, there is power: and who may say unto
him, What doest thou?  8:5 Whoso keepeth the commandment shall feel no
evil thing: and a wise man's heart discerneth both time and judgment.

8:6 Because to every purpose there is time and judgment, therefore the
misery of man is great upon him.

8:7 For he knoweth not that which shall be: for who can tell him when
it shall be?  8:8 There is no man that hath power over the spirit to
retain the spirit; neither hath he power in the day of death: and
there is no discharge in that war; neither shall wickedness deliver
those that are given to it.

8:9 All this have I seen, and applied my heart unto every work that is
done under the sun: there is a time wherein one man ruleth over
another to his own hurt.

8:10 And so I saw the wicked buried, who had come and gone from the
place of the holy, and they were forgotten in the city where they had
so done: this is also vanity.

8:11 Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily,
therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do
evil.

8:12 Though a sinner do evil an hundred times, and his days be
prolonged, yet surely I know that it shall be well with them that fear
God, which fear before him: 8:13 But it shall not be well with the
wicked, neither shall he prolong his days, which are as a shadow;
because he feareth not before God.

8:14 There is a vanity which is done upon the earth; that there be
just men, unto whom it happeneth according to the work of the wicked;
again, there be wicked men, to whom it happeneth according to the work
of the righteous: I said that this also is vanity.

8:15 Then I commended mirth, because a man hath no better thing under
the sun, than to eat, and to drink, and to be merry: for that shall
abide with him of his labour the days of his life, which God giveth
him under the sun.

8:16 When I applied mine heart to know wisdom, and to see the business
that is done upon the earth: (for also there is that neither day nor
night seeth sleep with his eyes:) 8:17 Then I beheld all the work of
God, that a man cannot find out the work that is done under the sun:
because though a man labour to seek it out, yet he shall not find it;
yea farther; though a wise man think to know it, yet shall he not be
able to find it.

9:1 For all this I considered in my heart even to declare all this,
that the righteous, and the wise, and their works, are in the hand of
God: no man knoweth either love or hatred by all that is before them.

9:2 All things come alike to all: there is one event to the righteous,
and to the wicked; to the good and to the clean, and to the unclean;
to him that sacrificeth, and to him that sacrificeth not: as is the
good, so is the sinner; and he that sweareth, as he that feareth an
oath.

9:3 This is an evil among all things that are done under the sun, that
there is one event unto all: yea, also the heart of the sons of men is
full of evil, and madness is in their heart while they live, and after
that they go to the dead.

9:4 For to him that is joined to all the living there is hope: for a
living dog is better than a dead lion.

9:5 For the living know that they shall die: but the dead know not any
thing, neither have they any more a reward; for the memory of them is
forgotten.

9:6 Also their love, and their hatred, and their envy, is now
perished; neither have they any more a portion for ever in any thing
that is done under the sun.

9:7 Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a
merry heart; for God now accepteth thy works.

9:8 Let thy garments be always white; and let thy head lack no
ointment.

9:9 Live joyfully with the wife whom thou lovest all the days of the
life of thy vanity, which he hath given thee under the sun, all the
days of thy vanity: for that is thy portion in this life, and in thy
labour which thou takest under the sun.

9:10 Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might; for
there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave,
whither thou goest.

9:11 I returned, and saw under the sun, that the race is not to the
swift, nor the battle to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise,
nor yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet favour to men of
skill; but time and chance happeneth to them all.

9:12 For man also knoweth not his time: as the fishes that are taken
in an evil net, and as the birds that are caught in the snare; so are
the sons of men snared in an evil time, when it falleth suddenly upon
them.

9:13 This wisdom have I seen also under the sun, and it seemed great
unto me: 9:14 There was a little city, and few men within it; and
there came a great king against it, and besieged it, and built great
bulwarks against it: 9:15 Now there was found in it a poor wise man,
and he by his wisdom delivered the city; yet no man remembered that
same poor man.

9:16 Then said I, Wisdom is better than strength: nevertheless the
poor man's wisdom is despised, and his words are not heard.

9:17 The words of wise men are heard in quiet more than the cry of him
that ruleth among fools.

9:18 Wisdom is better than weapons of war: but one sinner destroyeth
much good.

10:1 Dead flies cause the ointment of the apothecary to send forth a
stinking savour: so doth a little folly him that is in reputation for
wisdom and honour.

10:2 A wise man's heart is at his right hand; but a fool's heart at
his left.

10:3 Yea also, when he that is a fool walketh by the way, his wisdom
faileth him, and he saith to every one that he is a fool.

10:4 If the spirit of the ruler rise up against thee, leave not thy
place; for yielding pacifieth great offences.

10:5 There is an evil which I have seen under the sun, as an error
which proceedeth from the ruler: 10:6 Folly is set in great dignity,
and the rich sit in low place.

10:7 I have seen servants upon horses, and princes walking as servants
upon the earth.

10:8 He that diggeth a pit shall fall into it; and whoso breaketh an
hedge, a serpent shall bite him.

10:9 Whoso removeth stones shall be hurt therewith; and he that
cleaveth wood shall be endangered thereby.

10:10 If the iron be blunt, and he do not whet the edge, then must he
put to more strength: but wisdom is profitable to direct.

10:11 Surely the serpent will bite without enchantment; and a babbler
is no better.

10:12 The words of a wise man's mouth are gracious; but the lips of a
fool will swallow up himself.

10:13 The beginning of the words of his mouth is foolishness: and the
end of his talk is mischievous madness.

10:14 A fool also is full of words: a man cannot tell what shall be;
and what shall be after him, who can tell him?  10:15 The labour of
the foolish wearieth every one of them, because he knoweth not how to
go to the city.

10:16 Woe to thee, O land, when thy king is a child, and thy princes
eat in the morning!  10:17 Blessed art thou, O land, when thy king is
the son of nobles, and thy princes eat in due season, for strength,
and not for drunkenness!  10:18 By much slothfulness the building
decayeth; and through idleness of the hands the house droppeth
through.

10:19 A feast is made for laughter, and wine maketh merry: but money
answereth all things.

10:20 Curse not the king, no not in thy thought; and curse not the
rich in thy bedchamber: for a bird of the air shall carry the voice,
and that which hath wings shall tell the matter.

11:1 Cast thy bread upon the waters: for thou shalt find it after many
days.

11:2 Give a portion to seven, and also to eight; for thou knowest not
what evil shall be upon the earth.

11:3 If the clouds be full of rain, they empty themselves upon the
earth: and if the tree fall toward the south, or toward the north, in
the place where the tree falleth, there it shall be.

11:4 He that observeth the wind shall not sow; and he that regardeth
the clouds shall not reap.

11:5 As thou knowest not what is the way of the spirit, nor how the
bones do grow in the womb of her that is with child: even so thou
knowest not the works of God who maketh all.

11:6 In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withhold not
thine hand: for thou knowest not whether shall prosper, either this or
that, or whether they both shall be alike good.

11:7 Truly the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes
to behold the sun: 11:8 But if a man live many years, and rejoice in
them all; yet let him remember the days of darkness; for they shall be
many. All that cometh is vanity.

11:9 Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth; and let thy heart cheer thee
in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in
the sight of thine eyes: but know thou, that for all these things God
will bring thee into judgment.

11:10 Therefore remove sorrow from thy heart, and put away evil from
thy flesh: for childhood and youth are vanity.

12:1 Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil
days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shalt say, I have no
pleasure in them; 12:2 While the sun, or the light, or the moon, or
the stars, be not darkened, nor the clouds return after the rain: 12:3
In the day when the keepers of the house shall tremble, and the strong
men shall bow themselves, and the grinders cease because they are few,
and those that look out of the windows be darkened, 12:4 And the doors
shall be shut in the streets, when the sound of the grinding is low,
and he shall rise up at the voice of the bird, and all the daughters
of musick shall be brought low; 12:5 Also when they shall be afraid of
that which is high, and fears shall be in the way, and the almond tree
shall flourish, and the grasshopper shall be a burden, and desire
shall fail: because man goeth to his long home, and the mourners go
about the streets: 12:6 Or ever the silver cord be loosed, or the
golden bowl be broken, or the pitcher be broken at the fountain, or
the wheel broken at the cistern.

12:7 Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was: and the spirit
shall return unto God who gave it.

12:8 Vanity of vanities, saith the preacher; all is vanity.

12:9 And moreover, because the preacher was wise, he still taught the
people knowledge; yea, he gave good heed, and sought out, and set in
order many proverbs.

12:10 The preacher sought to find out acceptable words: and that which
was written was upright, even words of truth.

12:11 The words of the wise are as goads, and as nails fastened by the
masters of assemblies, which are given from one shepherd.

12:12 And further, by these, my son, be admonished: of making many
books there is no end; and much study is a weariness of the flesh.

12:13 Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God, and
keep his commandments: for this is the whole duty of man.

12:14 For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret
thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.




The Song of Solomon


1:1 The song of songs, which is Solomon's.

1:2 Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth: for thy love is
better than wine.

1:3 Because of the savour of thy good ointments thy name is as
ointment poured forth, therefore do the virgins love thee.

1:4 Draw me, we will run after thee: the king hath brought me into his
chambers: we will be glad and rejoice in thee, we will remember thy
love more than wine: the upright love thee.

1:5 I am black, but comely, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, as the tents
of Kedar, as the curtains of Solomon.

1:6 Look not upon me, because I am black, because the sun hath looked
upon me: my mother's children were angry with me; they made me the
keeper of the vineyards; but mine own vineyard have I not kept.

1:7 Tell me, O thou whom my soul loveth, where thou feedest, where
thou makest thy flock to rest at noon: for why should I be as one that
turneth aside by the flocks of thy companions?  1:8 If thou know not,
O thou fairest among women, go thy way forth by the footsteps of the
flock, and feed thy kids beside the shepherds' tents.

1:9 I have compared thee, O my love, to a company of horses in
Pharaoh's chariots.

1:10 Thy cheeks are comely with rows of jewels, thy neck with chains
of gold.

1:11 We will make thee borders of gold with studs of silver.

1:12 While the king sitteth at his table, my spikenard sendeth forth
the smell thereof.

1:13 A bundle of myrrh is my well-beloved unto me; he shall lie all
night betwixt my breasts.

1:14 My beloved is unto me as a cluster of camphire in the vineyards
of Engedi.

1:15 Behold, thou art fair, my love; behold, thou art fair; thou hast
doves' eyes.

1:16 Behold, thou art fair, my beloved, yea, pleasant: also our bed is
green.

1:17 The beams of our house are cedar, and our rafters of fir.

2:1 I am the rose of Sharon, and the lily of the valleys.

2:2 As the lily among thorns, so is my love among the daughters.

2:3 As the apple tree among the trees of the wood, so is my beloved
among the sons. I sat down under his shadow with great delight, and
his fruit was sweet to my taste.

2:4 He brought me to the banqueting house, and his banner over me was
love.

2:5 Stay me with flagons, comfort me with apples: for I am sick of
love.

2:6 His left hand is under my head, and his right hand doth embrace
me.

2:7 I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the roes, and by the
hinds of the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake my love, till he
please.

2:8 The voice of my beloved! behold, he cometh leaping upon the
mountains, skipping upon the hills.

2:9 My beloved is like a roe or a young hart: behold, he standeth
behind our wall, he looketh forth at the windows, shewing himself
through the lattice.

2:10 My beloved spake, and said unto me, Rise up, my love, my fair
one, and come away.

2:11 For, lo, the winter is past, the rain is over and gone; 2:12 The
flowers appear on the earth; the time of the singing of birds is come,
and the voice of the turtle is heard in our land; 2:13 The fig tree
putteth forth her green figs, and the vines with the tender grape give
a good smell. Arise, my love, my fair one, and come away.

2:14 O my dove, that art in the clefts of the rock, in the secret
places of the stairs, let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy
voice; for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is comely.

2:15 Take us the foxes, the little foxes, that spoil the vines: for
our vines have tender grapes.

2:16 My beloved is mine, and I am his: he feedeth among the lilies.

2:17 Until the day break, and the shadows flee away, turn, my beloved,
and be thou like a roe or a young hart upon the mountains of Bether.

3:1 By night on my bed I sought him whom my soul loveth: I sought him,
but I found him not.

3:2 I will rise now, and go about the city in the streets, and in the
broad ways I will seek him whom my soul loveth: I sought him, but I
found him not.

3:3 The watchmen that go about the city found me: to whom I said, Saw
ye him whom my soul loveth?  3:4 It was but a little that I passed
from them, but I found him whom my soul loveth: I held him, and would
not let him go, until I had brought him into my mother's house, and
into the chamber of her that conceived me.

3:5 I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the roes, and by the
hinds of the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake my love, till he
please.

3:6 Who is this that cometh out of the wilderness like pillars of
smoke, perfumed with myrrh and frankincense, with all powders of the
merchant?  3:7 Behold his bed, which is Solomon's; threescore valiant
men are about it, of the valiant of Israel.

3:8 They all hold swords, being expert in war: every man hath his
sword upon his thigh because of fear in the night.

3:9 King Solomon made himself a chariot of the wood of Lebanon.

3:10 He made the pillars thereof of silver, the bottom thereof of
gold, the covering of it of purple, the midst thereof being paved with
love, for the daughters of Jerusalem.

3:11 Go forth, O ye daughters of Zion, and behold king Solomon with
the crown wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his
espousals, and in the day of the gladness of his heart.

4:1 Behold, thou art fair, my love; behold, thou art fair; thou hast
doves' eyes within thy locks: thy hair is as a flock of goats, that
appear from mount Gilead.

4:2 Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep that are even shorn, which
came up from the washing; whereof every one bear twins, and none is
barren among them.

4:3 Thy lips are like a thread of scarlet, and thy speech is comely:
thy temples are like a piece of a pomegranate within thy locks.

4:4 Thy neck is like the tower of David builded for an armoury,
whereon there hang a thousand bucklers, all shields of mighty men.

4:5 Thy two breasts are like two young roes that are twins, which feed
among the lilies.

4:6 Until the day break, and the shadows flee away, I will get me to
the mountain of myrrh, and to the hill of frankincense.

4:7 Thou art all fair, my love; there is no spot in thee.

4:8 Come with me from Lebanon, my spouse, with me from Lebanon: look
from the top of Amana, from the top of Shenir and Hermon, from the
lions' dens, from the mountains of the leopards.

4:9 Thou hast ravished my heart, my sister, my spouse; thou hast
ravished my heart with one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck.

4:10 How fair is thy love, my sister, my spouse! how much better is
thy love than wine! and the smell of thine ointments than all spices!
4:11 Thy lips, O my spouse, drop as the honeycomb: honey and milk are
under thy tongue; and the smell of thy garments is like the smell of
Lebanon.

4:12 A garden inclosed is my sister, my spouse; a spring shut up, a
fountain sealed.

4:13 Thy plants are an orchard of pomegranates, with pleasant fruits;
camphire, with spikenard, 4:14 Spikenard and saffron; calamus and
cinnamon, with all trees of frankincense; myrrh and aloes, with all
the chief spices: 4:15 A fountain of gardens, a well of living waters,
and streams from Lebanon.

4:16 Awake, O north wind; and come, thou south; blow upon my garden,
that the spices thereof may flow out. Let my beloved come into his
garden, and eat his pleasant fruits.

5:1 I am come into my garden, my sister, my spouse: I have gathered my
myrrh with my spice; I have eaten my honeycomb with my honey; I have
drunk my wine with my milk: eat, O friends; drink, yea, drink
abundantly, O beloved.

5:2 I sleep, but my heart waketh: it is the voice of my beloved that
knocketh, saying, Open to me, my sister, my love, my dove, my
undefiled: for my head is filled with dew, and my locks with the drops
of the night.

5:3 I have put off my coat; how shall I put it on? I have washed my
feet; how shall I defile them?  5:4 My beloved put in his hand by the
hole of the door, and my bowels were moved for him.

5:5 I rose up to open to my beloved; and my hands dropped with myrrh,
and my fingers with sweet smelling myrrh, upon the handles of the
lock.

5:6 I opened to my beloved; but my beloved had withdrawn himself, and
was gone: my soul failed when he spake: I sought him, but I could not
find him; I called him, but he gave me no answer.

5:7 The watchmen that went about the city found me, they smote me,
they wounded me; the keepers of the walls took away my veil from me.

5:8 I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my beloved,
that ye tell him, that I am sick of love.

5:9 What is thy beloved more than another beloved, O thou fairest
among women? what is thy beloved more than another beloved, that thou
dost so charge us?  5:10 My beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest
among ten thousand.

5:11 His head is as the most fine gold, his locks are bushy, and black
as a raven.

5:12 His eyes are as the eyes of doves by the rivers of waters, washed
with milk, and fitly set.

5:13 His cheeks are as a bed of spices, as sweet flowers: his lips
like lilies, dropping sweet smelling myrrh.

5:14 His hands are as gold rings set with the beryl: his belly is as
bright ivory overlaid with sapphires.

5:15 His legs are as pillars of marble, set upon sockets of fine gold:
his countenance is as Lebanon, excellent as the cedars.

5:16 His mouth is most sweet: yea, he is altogether lovely. This is my
beloved, and this is my friend, O daughters of Jerusalem.

6:1 Whither is thy beloved gone, O thou fairest among women? whither
is thy beloved turned aside? that we may seek him with thee.

6:2 My beloved is gone down into his garden, to the beds of spices, to
feed in the gardens, and to gather lilies.

6:3 I am my beloved's, and my beloved is mine: he feedeth among the
lilies.

6:4 Thou art beautiful, O my love, as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem,
terrible as an army with banners.

6:5 Turn away thine eyes from me, for they have overcome me: thy hair
is as a flock of goats that appear from Gilead.

6:6 Thy teeth are as a flock of sheep which go up from the washing,
whereof every one beareth twins, and there is not one barren among
them.

6:7 As a piece of a pomegranate are thy temples within thy locks.

6:8 There are threescore queens, and fourscore concubines, and virgins
without number.

6:9 My dove, my undefiled is but one; she is the only one of her
mother, she is the choice one of her that bare her. The daughters saw
her, and blessed her; yea, the queens and the concubines, and they
praised her.

6:10 Who is she that looketh forth as the morning, fair as the moon,
clear as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners?  6:11 I went
down into the garden of nuts to see the fruits of the valley, and to
see whether the vine flourished and the pomegranates budded.

6:12 Or ever I was aware, my soul made me like the chariots of
Amminadib.

6:13 Return, return, O Shulamite; return, return, that we may look
upon thee. What will ye see in the Shulamite? As it were the company
of two armies.

7:1 How beautiful are thy feet with shoes, O prince's daughter! the
joints of thy thighs are like jewels, the work of the hands of a
cunning workman.

7:2 Thy navel is like a round goblet, which wanteth not liquor: thy
belly is like an heap of wheat set about with lilies.

7:3 Thy two breasts are like two young roes that are twins.

7:4 Thy neck is as a tower of ivory; thine eyes like the fishpools in
Heshbon, by the gate of Bathrabbim: thy nose is as the tower of
Lebanon which looketh toward Damascus.

7:5 Thine head upon thee is like Carmel, and the hair of thine head
like purple; the king is held in the galleries.

7:6 How fair and how pleasant art thou, O love, for delights!  7:7
This thy stature is like to a palm tree, and thy breasts to clusters
of grapes.

7:8 I said, I will go up to the palm tree, I will take hold of the
boughs thereof: now also thy breasts shall be as clusters of the vine,
and the smell of thy nose like apples; 7:9 And the roof of thy mouth
like the best wine for my beloved, that goeth down sweetly, causing
the lips of those that are asleep to speak.

7:10 I am my beloved's, and his desire is toward me.

7:11 Come, my beloved, let us go forth into the field; let us lodge in
the villages.

7:12 Let us get up early to the vineyards; let us see if the vine
flourish, whether the tender grape appear, and the pomegranates bud
forth: there will I give thee my loves.

7:13 The mandrakes give a smell, and at our gates are all manner of
pleasant fruits, new and old, which I have laid up for thee, O my
beloved.

8:1 O that thou wert as my brother, that sucked the breasts of my
mother!  when I should find thee without, I would kiss thee; yea, I
should not be despised.

8:2 I would lead thee, and bring thee into my mother's house, who
would instruct me: I would cause thee to drink of spiced wine of the
juice of my pomegranate.

8:3 His left hand should be under my head, and his right hand should
embrace me.

8:4 I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, that ye stir not up, nor
awake my love, until he please.

8:5 Who is this that cometh up from the wilderness, leaning upon her
beloved? I raised thee up under the apple tree: there thy mother
brought thee forth: there she brought thee forth that bare thee.

8:6 Set me as a seal upon thine heart, as a seal upon thine arm: for
love is strong as death; jealousy is cruel as the grave: the coals
thereof are coals of fire, which hath a most vehement flame.

8:7 Many waters cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it:
if a man would give all the substance of his house for love, it would
utterly be contemned.

8:8 We have a little sister, and she hath no breasts: what shall we do
for our sister in the day when she shall be spoken for?  8:9 If she be
a wall, we will build upon her a palace of silver: and if she be a
door, we will inclose her with boards of cedar.

8:10 I am a wall, and my breasts like towers: then was I in his eyes
as one that found favour.

8:11 Solomon had a vineyard at Baalhamon; he let out the vineyard unto
keepers; every one for the fruit thereof was to bring a thousand
pieces of silver.

8:12 My vineyard, which is mine, is before me: thou, O Solomon, must
have a thousand, and those that keep the fruit thereof two hundred.

8:13 Thou that dwellest in the gardens, the companions hearken to thy
voice: cause me to hear it.

8:14 Make haste, my beloved, and be thou like to a roe or to a young
hart upon the mountains of spices.




The Book of the Prophet Isaiah


1:1 The vision of Isaiah the son of Amoz, which he saw concerning
Judah and Jerusalem in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah,
kings of Judah.

1:2 Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth: for the LORD hath spoken,
I have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled
against me.

1:3 The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his master's crib: but
Israel doth not know, my people doth not consider.

1:4 Ah sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of
evildoers, children that are corrupters: they have forsaken the LORD,
they have provoked the Holy One of Israel unto anger, they are gone
away backward.

1:5 Why should ye be stricken any more? ye will revolt more and more:
the whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint.

1:6 From the sole of the foot even unto the head there is no soundness
in it; but wounds, and bruises, and putrifying sores: they have not
been closed, neither bound up, neither mollified with ointment.

1:7 Your country is desolate, your cities are burned with fire: your
land, strangers devour it in your presence, and it is desolate, as
overthrown by strangers.

1:8 And the daughter of Zion is left as a cottage in a vineyard, as a
lodge in a garden of cucumbers, as a besieged city.

1:9 Except the LORD of hosts had left unto us a very small remnant, we
should have been as Sodom, and we should have been like unto Gomorrah.

1:10 Hear the word of the LORD, ye rulers of Sodom; give ear unto the
law of our God, ye people of Gomorrah.

1:11 To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me?
saith the LORD: I am full of the burnt offerings of rams, and the fat
of fed beasts; and I delight not in the blood of bullocks, or of
lambs, or of he goats.

1:12 When ye come to appear before me, who hath required this at your
hand, to tread my courts?  1:13 Bring no more vain oblations; incense
is an abomination unto me; the new moons and sabbaths, the calling of
assemblies, I cannot away with; it is iniquity, even the solemn
meeting.

1:14 Your new moons and your appointed feasts my soul hateth: they are
a trouble unto me; I am weary to bear them.

1:15 And when ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from
you: yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not hear: your hands are
full of blood.

1:16 Wash you, make you clean; put away the evil of your doings from
before mine eyes; cease to do evil; 1:17 Learn to do well; seek
judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the
widow.

1:18 Come now, and let us reason together, saith the LORD: though your
sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red
like crimson, they shall be as wool.

1:19 If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land:
1:20 But if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the sword:
for the mouth of the LORD hath spoken it.

1:21 How is the faithful city become an harlot! it was full of
judgment; righteousness lodged in it; but now murderers.

1:22 Thy silver is become dross, thy wine mixed with water: 1:23 Thy
princes are rebellious, and companions of thieves: every one loveth
gifts, and followeth after rewards: they judge not the fatherless,
neither doth the cause of the widow come unto them.

1:24 Therefore saith the LORD, the LORD of hosts, the mighty One of
Israel, Ah, I will ease me of mine adversaries, and avenge me of mine
enemies: 1:25 And I will turn my hand upon thee, and purely purge away
thy dross, and take away all thy tin: 1:26 And I will restore thy
judges as at the first, and thy counsellors as at the beginning:
afterward thou shalt be called, The city of righteousness, the
faithful city.

1:27 Zion shall be redeemed with judgment, and her converts with
righteousness.

1:28 And the destruction of the transgressors and of the sinners shall
be together, and they that forsake the LORD shall be consumed.

1:29 For they shall be ashamed of the oaks which ye have desired, and
ye shall be confounded for the gardens that ye have chosen.

1:30 For ye shall be as an oak whose leaf fadeth, and as a garden that
hath no water.

1:31 And the strong shall be as tow, and the maker of it as a spark,
and they shall both burn together, and none shall quench them.

2:1 The word that Isaiah the son of Amoz saw concerning Judah and
Jerusalem.

2:2 And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of
the LORD's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and
shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it.

2:3 And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the
mountain of the LORD, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will
teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for out of Zion
shall go forth the law, and the word of the LORD from Jerusalem.

2:4 And he shall judge among the nations, and shall rebuke many
people: and they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their
spears into pruninghooks: nation shall not lift up sword against
nation, neither shall they learn war any more.

2:5 O house of Jacob, come ye, and let us walk in the light of the
LORD.

2:6 Therefore thou hast forsaken thy people the house of Jacob,
because they be replenished from the east, and are soothsayers like
the Philistines, and they please themselves in the children of
strangers.

2:7 Their land also is full of silver and gold, neither is there any
end of their treasures; their land is also full of horses, neither is
there any end of their chariots: 2:8 Their land also is full of idols;
they worship the work of their own hands, that which their own fingers
have made: 2:9 And the mean man boweth down, and the great man
humbleth himself: therefore forgive them not.

2:10 Enter into the rock, and hide thee in the dust, for fear of the
LORD, and for the glory of his majesty.

2:11 The lofty looks of man shall be humbled, and the haughtiness of
men shall be bowed down, and the LORD alone shall be exalted in that
day.

2:12 For the day of the LORD of hosts shall be upon every one that is
proud and lofty, and upon every one that is lifted up; and he shall be
brought low: 2:13 And upon all the cedars of Lebanon, that are high
and lifted up, and upon all the oaks of Bashan, 2:14 And upon all the
high mountains, and upon all the hills that are lifted up, 2:15 And
upon every high tower, and upon every fenced wall, 2:16 And upon all
the ships of Tarshish, and upon all pleasant pictures.

2:17 And the loftiness of man shall be bowed down, and the haughtiness
of men shall be made low: and the LORD alone shall be exalted in that
day.

2:18 And the idols he shall utterly abolish.

2:19 And they shall go into the holes of the rocks, and into the caves
of the earth, for fear of the LORD, and for the glory of his majesty,
when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth.

2:20 In that day a man shall cast his idols of silver, and his idols
of gold, which they made each one for himself to worship, to the moles
and to the bats; 2:21 To go into the clefts of the rocks, and into the
tops of the ragged rocks, for fear of the LORD, and for the glory of
his majesty, when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth.

2:22 Cease ye from man, whose breath is in his nostrils: for wherein
is he to be accounted of ?  3:1 For, behold, the Lord, the LORD of
hosts, doth take away from Jerusalem and from Judah the stay and the
staff, the whole stay of bread, and the whole stay of water.

3:2 The mighty man, and the man of war, the judge, and the prophet,
and the prudent, and the ancient, 3:3 The captain of fifty, and the
honourable man, and the counsellor, and the cunning artificer, and the
eloquent orator.

3:4 And I will give children to be their princes, and babes shall rule
over them.

3:5 And the people shall be oppressed, every one by another, and every
one by his neighbour: the child shall behave himself proudly against
the ancient, and the base against the honourable.

3:6 When a man shall take hold of his brother of the house of his
father, saying, Thou hast clothing, be thou our ruler, and let this
ruin be under thy hand: 3:7 In that day shall he swear, saying, I will
not be an healer; for in my house is neither bread nor clothing: make
me not a ruler of the people.

3:8 For Jerusalem is ruined, and Judah is fallen: because their tongue
and their doings are against the LORD, to provoke the eyes of his
glory.

3:9 The shew of their countenance doth witness against them; and they
declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not. Woe unto their soul! for
they have rewarded evil unto themselves.

3:10 Say ye to the righteous, that it shall be well with him: for they
shall eat the fruit of their doings.

3:11 Woe unto the wicked! it shall be ill with him: for the reward of
his hands shall be given him.

3:12 As for my people, children are their oppressors, and women rule
over them. O my people, they which lead thee cause thee to err, and
destroy the way of thy paths.

3:13 The LORD standeth up to plead, and standeth to judge the people.

3:14 The LORD will enter into judgment with the ancients of his
people, and the princes thereof: for ye have eaten up the vineyard;
the spoil of the poor is in your houses.

3:15 What mean ye that ye beat my people to pieces, and grind the
faces of the poor? saith the Lord GOD of hosts.

3:16 Moreover the LORD saith, Because the daughters of Zion are
haughty, and walk with stretched forth necks and wanton eyes, walking
and mincing as they go, and making a tinkling with their feet: 3:17
Therefore the LORD will smite with a scab the crown of the head of the
daughters of Zion, and the LORD will discover their secret parts.

3:18 In that day the Lord will take away the bravery of their tinkling
ornaments about their feet, and their cauls, and their round tires
like the moon, 3:19 The chains, and the bracelets, and the mufflers,
3:20 The bonnets, and the ornaments of the legs, and the headbands,
and the tablets, and the earrings, 3:21 The rings, and nose jewels,
3:22 The changeable suits of apparel, and the mantles, and the
wimples, and the crisping pins, 3:23 The glasses, and the fine linen,
and the hoods, and the vails.

3:24 And it shall come to pass, that instead of sweet smell there
shall be stink; and instead of a girdle a rent; and instead of well
set hair baldness; and instead of a stomacher a girding of sackcloth;
and burning instead of beauty.

3:25 Thy men shall fall by the sword, and thy mighty in the war.

3:26 And her gates shall lament and mourn; and she being desolate
shall sit upon the ground.

4:1 And in that day seven women shall take hold of one man, saying, We
will eat our own bread, and wear our own apparel: only let us be
called by thy name, to take away our reproach.

4:2 In that day shall the branch of the LORD be beautiful and
glorious, and the fruit of the earth shall be excellent and comely for
them that are escaped of Israel.

4:3 And it shall come to pass, that he that is left in Zion, and he
that remaineth in Jerusalem, shall be called holy, even every one that
is written among the living in Jerusalem: 4:4 When the Lord shall have
washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion, and shall have purged
the blood of Jerusalem from the midst thereof by the spirit of
judgment, and by the spirit of burning.

4:5 And the LORD will create upon every dwelling place of mount Zion,
and upon her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of
a flaming fire by night: for upon all the glory shall be a defence.

4:6 And there shall be a tabernacle for a shadow in the day time from
the heat, and for a place of refuge, and for a covert from storm and
from rain.

5:1 Now will I sing to my wellbeloved a song of my beloved touching
his vineyard. My wellbeloved hath a vineyard in a very fruitful hill:
5:2 And he fenced it, and gathered out the stones thereof, and planted
it with the choicest vine, and built a tower in the midst of it, and
also made a winepress therein: and he looked that it should bring
forth grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes.

5:3 And now, O inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, judge, I
pray you, betwixt me and my vineyard.

5:4 What could have been done more to my vineyard, that I have not
done in it? wherefore, when I looked that it should bring forth
grapes, brought it forth wild grapes?  5:5 And now go to; I will tell
you what I will do to my vineyard: I will take away the hedge thereof,
and it shall be eaten up; and break down the wall thereof, and it
shall be trodden down: 5:6 And I will lay it waste: it shall not be
pruned, nor digged; but there shall come up briers and thorns: I will
also command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it.

5:7 For the vineyard of the LORD of hosts is the house of Israel, and
the men of Judah his pleasant plant: and he looked for judgment, but
behold oppression; for righteousness, but behold a cry.

5:8 Woe unto them that join house to house, that lay field to field,
till there be no place, that they may be placed alone in the midst of
the earth!  5:9 In mine ears said the LORD of hosts, Of a truth many
houses shall be desolate, even great and fair, without inhabitant.

5:10 Yea, ten acres of vineyard shall yield one bath, and the seed of
an homer shall yield an ephah.

5:11 Woe unto them that rise up early in the morning, that they may
follow strong drink; that continue until night, till wine inflame
them!  5:12 And the harp, and the viol, the tabret, and pipe, and
wine, are in their feasts: but they regard not the work of the LORD,
neither consider the operation of his hands.

5:13 Therefore my people are gone into captivity, because they have no
knowledge: and their honourable men are famished, and their multitude
dried up with thirst.

5:14 Therefore hell hath enlarged herself, and opened her mouth
without measure: and their glory, and their multitude, and their pomp,
and he that rejoiceth, shall descend into it.

5:15 And the mean man shall be brought down, and the mighty man shall
be humbled, and the eyes of the lofty shall be humbled: 5:16 But the
LORD of hosts shall be exalted in judgment, and God that is holy shall
be sanctified in righteousness.

5:17 Then shall the lambs feed after their manner, and the waste
places of the fat ones shall strangers eat.

5:18 Woe unto them that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as
it were with a cart rope: 5:19 That say, Let him make speed, and
hasten his work, that we may see it: and let the counsel of the Holy
One of Israel draw nigh and come, that we may know it!  5:20 Woe unto
them that call evil good, and good evil; that put darkness for light,
and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for
bitter!  5:21 Woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes, and
prudent in their own sight!  5:22 Woe unto them that are mighty to
drink wine, and men of strength to mingle strong drink: 5:23 Which
justify the wicked for reward, and take away the righteousness of the
righteous from him!  5:24 Therefore as the fire devoureth the stubble,
and the flame consumeth the chaff, so their root shall be as
rottenness, and their blossom shall go up as dust: because they have
cast away the law of the LORD of hosts, and despised the word of the
Holy One of Israel.

5:25 Therefore is the anger of the LORD kindled against his people,
and he hath stretched forth his hand against them, and hath smitten
them: and the hills did tremble, and their carcases were torn in the
midst of the streets.

For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched
out still.

5:26 And he will lift up an ensign to the nations from far, and will
hiss unto them from the end of the earth: and, behold, they shall come
with speed swiftly: 5:27 None shall be weary nor stumble among them;
none shall slumber nor sleep; neither shall the girdle of their loins
be loosed, nor the latchet of their shoes be broken: 5:28 Whose arrows
are sharp, and all their bows bent, their horses' hoofs shall be
counted like flint, and their wheels like a whirlwind: 5:29 Their
roaring shall be like a lion, they shall roar like young lions: yea,
they shall roar, and lay hold of the prey, and shall carry it away
safe, and none shall deliver it.

5:30 And in that day they shall roar against them like the roaring of
the sea: and if one look unto the land, behold darkness and sorrow,
and the light is darkened in the heavens thereof.

6:1 In the year that king Uzziah died I saw also the LORD sitting upon
a throne, high and lifted up, and his train filled the temple.

6:2 Above it stood the seraphims: each one had six wings; with twain
he covered his face, and with twain he covered his feet, and with
twain he did fly.

6:3 And one cried unto another, and said, Holy, holy, holy, is the
LORD of hosts: the whole earth is full of his glory.

6:4 And the posts of the door moved at the voice of him that cried,
and the house was filled with smoke.

6:5 Then said I, Woe is me! for I am undone; because I am a man of
unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips:
for mine eyes have seen the King, the LORD of hosts.

6:6 Then flew one of the seraphims unto me, having a live coal in his
hand, which he had taken with the tongs from off the altar: 6:7 And he
laid it upon my mouth, and said, Lo, this hath touched thy lips; and
thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin purged.

6:8 Also I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, Whom shall I send, and
who will go for us? Then said I, Here am I; send me.

6:9 And he said, Go, and tell this people, Hear ye indeed, but
understand not; and see ye indeed, but perceive not.

6:10 Make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and
shut their eyes; lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their
ears, and understand with their heart, and convert, and be healed.

6:11 Then said I, Lord, how long? And he answered, Until the cities be
wasted without inhabitant, and the houses without man, and the land be
utterly desolate, 6:12 And the LORD have removed men far away, and
there be a great forsaking in the midst of the land.

6:13 But yet in it shall be a tenth, and it shall return, and shall be
eaten: as a teil tree, and as an oak, whose substance is in them, when
they cast their leaves: so the holy seed shall be the substance
thereof.

7:1 And it came to pass in the days of Ahaz the son of Jotham, the son
of Uzziah, king of Judah, that Rezin the king of Syria, and Pekah the
son of Remaliah, king of Israel, went up toward Jerusalem to war
against it, but could not prevail against it.

7:2 And it was told the house of David, saying, Syria is confederate
with Ephraim. And his heart was moved, and the heart of his people, as
the trees of the wood are moved with the wind.

7:3 Then said the LORD unto Isaiah, Go forth now to meet Ahaz, thou,
and Shearjashub thy son, at the end of the conduit of the upper pool
in the highway of the fuller's field; 7:4 And say unto him, Take heed,
and be quiet; fear not, neither be fainthearted for the two tails of
these smoking firebrands, for the fierce anger of Rezin with Syria,
and of the son of Remaliah.

7:5 Because Syria, Ephraim, and the son of Remaliah, have taken evil
counsel against thee, saying, 7:6 Let us go up against Judah, and vex
it, and let us make a breach therein for us, and set a king in the
midst of it, even the son of Tabeal: 7:7 Thus saith the Lord GOD, It
shall not stand, neither shall it come to pass.

7:8 For the head of Syria is Damascus, and the head of Damascus is
Rezin; and within threescore and five years shall Ephraim be broken,
that it be not a people.

7:9 And the head of Ephraim is Samaria, and the head of Samaria is
Remaliah's son. If ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be
established.

7:10 Moreover the LORD spake again unto Ahaz, saying, 7:11 Ask thee a
sign of the LORD thy God; ask it either in the depth, or in the height
above.

7:12 But Ahaz said, I will not ask, neither will I tempt the LORD.

7:13 And he said, Hear ye now, O house of David; Is it a small thing
for you to weary men, but will ye weary my God also?  7:14 Therefore
the Lord himself shall give you a sign; Behold, a virgin shall
conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel.

7:15 Butter and honey shall he eat, that he may know to refuse the
evil, and choose the good.

7:16 For before the child shall know to refuse the evil, and choose
the good, the land that thou abhorrest shall be forsaken of both her
kings.

7:17 The LORD shall bring upon thee, and upon thy people, and upon thy
father's house, days that have not come, from the day that Ephraim
departed from Judah; even the king of Assyria.

7:18 And it shall come to pass in that day, that the LORD shall hiss
for the fly that is in the uttermost part of the rivers of Egypt, and
for the bee that is in the land of Assyria.

7:19 And they shall come, and shall rest all of them in the desolate
valleys, and in the holes of the rocks, and upon all thorns, and upon
all bushes.

7:20 In the same day shall the Lord shave with a razor that is hired,
namely, by them beyond the river, by the king of Assyria, the head,
and the hair of the feet: and it shall also consume the beard.

7:21 And it shall come to pass in that day, that a man shall nourish a
young cow, and two sheep; 7:22 And it shall come to pass, for the
abundance of milk that they shall give he shall eat butter: for butter
and honey shall every one eat that is left in the land.

7:23 And it shall come to pass in that day, that every place shall be,
where there were a thousand vines at a thousand silverlings, it shall
even be for briers and thorns.

7:24 With arrows and with bows shall men come thither; because all the
land shall become briers and thorns.

7:25 And on all hills that shall be digged with the mattock, there
shall not come thither the fear of briers and thorns: but it shall be
for the sending forth of oxen, and for the treading of lesser cattle.

8:1 Moreover the LORD said unto me, Take thee a great roll, and write
in it with a man's pen concerning Mahershalalhashbaz.

8:2 And I took unto me faithful witnesses to record, Uriah the priest,
and Zechariah the son of Jeberechiah.

8:3 And I went unto the prophetess; and she conceived, and bare a son.

Then said the LORD to me, Call his name Mahershalalhashbaz.

8:4 For before the child shall have knowledge to cry, My father, and
my mother, the riches of Damascus and the spoil of Samaria shall be
taken away before the king of Assyria.

8:5 The LORD spake also unto me again, saying, 8:6 Forasmuch as this
people refuseth the waters of Shiloah that go softly, and rejoice in
Rezin and Remaliah's son; 8:7 Now therefore, behold, the Lord bringeth
up upon them the waters of the river, strong and many, even the king
of Assyria, and all his glory: and he shall come up over all his
channels, and go over all his banks: 8:8 And he shall pass through
Judah; he shall overflow and go over, he shall reach even to the neck;
and the stretching out of his wings shall fill the breadth of thy
land, O Immanuel.

8:9 Associate yourselves, O ye people, and ye shall be broken in
pieces; and give ear, all ye of far countries: gird yourselves, and ye
shall be broken in pieces; gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in
pieces.

8:10 Take counsel together, and it shall come to nought; speak the
word, and it shall not stand: for God is with us.

8:11 For the LORD spake thus to me with a strong hand, and instructed
me that I should not walk in the way of this people, saying, 8:12 Say
ye not, A confederacy, to all them to whom this people shall say, A
confederacy; neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid.

8:13 Sanctify the LORD of hosts himself; and let him be your fear, and
let him be your dread.

8:14 And he shall be for a sanctuary; but for a stone of stumbling and
for a rock of offence to both the houses of Israel, for a gin and for
a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

8:15 And many among them shall stumble, and fall, and be broken, and
be snared, and be taken.

8:16 Bind up the testimony, seal the law among my disciples.

8:17 And I will wait upon the LORD, that hideth his face from the
house of Jacob, and I will look for him.

8:18 Behold, I and the children whom the LORD hath given me are for
signs and for wonders in Israel from the LORD of hosts, which dwelleth
in mount Zion.

8:19 And when they shall say unto you, Seek unto them that have
familiar spirits, and unto wizards that peep, and that mutter: should
not a people seek unto their God? for the living to the dead?  8:20 To
the law and to the testimony: if they speak not according to this
word, it is because there is no light in them.

8:21 And they shall pass through it, hardly bestead and hungry: and it
shall come to pass, that when they shall be hungry, they shall fret
themselves, and curse their king and their God, and look upward.

8:22 And they shall look unto the earth; and behold trouble and
darkness, dimness of anguish; and they shall be driven to darkness.

9:1 Nevertheless the dimness shall not be such as was in her vexation,
when at the first he lightly afflicted the land of Zebulun and the
land of Naphtali, and afterward did more grievously afflict her by the
way of the sea, beyond Jordan, in Galilee of the nations.

9:2 The people that walked in darkness have seen a great light: they
that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them hath the
light shined.

9:3 Thou hast multiplied the nation, and not increased the joy: they
joy before thee according to the joy in harvest, and as men rejoice
when they divide the spoil.

9:4 For thou hast broken the yoke of his burden, and the staff of his
shoulder, the rod of his oppressor, as in the day of Midian.

9:5 For every battle of the warrior is with confused noise, and
garments rolled in blood; but this shall be with burning and fuel of
fire.

9:6 For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given: and the
government shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called
Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The
Prince of Peace.

9:7 Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end,
upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to order it, and to
establish it with judgment and with justice from henceforth even for
ever. The zeal of the LORD of hosts will perform this.

9:8 The Lord sent a word into Jacob, and it hath lighted upon Israel.

9:9 And all the people shall know, even Ephraim and the inhabitant of
Samaria, that say in the pride and stoutness of heart, 9:10 The bricks
are fallen down, but we will build with hewn stones: the sycomores are
cut down, but we will change them into cedars.

9:11 Therefore the LORD shall set up the adversaries of Rezin against
him, and join his enemies together; 9:12 The Syrians before, and the
Philistines behind; and they shall devour Israel with open mouth. For
all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out
still.

9:13 For the people turneth not unto him that smiteth them, neither do
they seek the LORD of hosts.

9:14 Therefore the LORD will cut off from Israel head and tail, branch
and rush, in one day.

9:15 The ancient and honourable, he is the head; and the prophet that
teacheth lies, he is the tail.

9:16 For the leaders of this people cause them to err; and they that
are led of them are destroyed.

9:17 Therefore the LORD shall have no joy in their young men, neither
shall have mercy on their fatherless and widows: for every one is an
hypocrite and an evildoer, and every mouth speaketh folly. For all
this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out
still.

9:18 For wickedness burneth as the fire: it shall devour the briers
and thorns, and shall kindle in the thickets of the forest, and they
shall mount up like the lifting up of smoke.

9:19 Through the wrath of the LORD of hosts is the land darkened, and
the people shall be as the fuel of the fire: no man shall spare his
brother.

9:20 And he shall snatch on the right hand, and be hungry; and he
shall eat on the left hand, and they shall not be satisfied: they
shall eat every man the flesh of his own arm: 9:21 Manasseh, Ephraim;
and Ephraim, Manasseh: and they together shall be against Judah. For
all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out
still.

10:1 Woe unto them that decree unrighteous decrees, and that write
grievousness which they have prescribed; 10:2 To turn aside the needy
from judgment, and to take away the right from the poor of my people,
that widows may be their prey, and that they may rob the fatherless!
10:3 And what will ye do in the day of visitation, and in the
desolation which shall come from far? to whom will ye flee for help?
and where will ye leave your glory?  10:4 Without me they shall bow
down under the prisoners, and they shall fall under the slain. For all
this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out
still.

10:5 O Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, and the staff in their hand is
mine indignation.

10:6 I will send him against an hypocritical nation, and against the
people of my wrath will I give him a charge, to take the spoil, and to
take the prey, and to tread them down like the mire of the streets.

10:7 Howbeit he meaneth not so, neither doth his heart think so; but
it is in his heart to destroy and cut off nations not a few.

10:8 For he saith, Are not my princes altogether kings?  10:9 Is not
Calno as Carchemish? is not Hamath as Arpad? is not Samaria as
Damascus?  10:10 As my hand hath found the kingdoms of the idols, and
whose graven images did excel them of Jerusalem and of Samaria; 10:11
Shall I not, as I have done unto Samaria and her idols, so do to
Jerusalem and her idols?  10:12 Wherefore it shall come to pass, that
when the Lord hath performed his whole work upon mount Zion and on
Jerusalem, I will punish the fruit of the stout heart of the king of
Assyria, and the glory of his high looks.

10:13 For he saith, By the strength of my hand I have done it, and by
my wisdom; for I am prudent: and I have removed the bounds of the
people, and have robbed their treasures, and I have put down the
inhabitants like a valiant man: 10:14 And my hand hath found as a nest
the riches of the people: and as one gathereth eggs that are left,
have I gathered all the earth; and there was none that moved the wing,
or opened the mouth, or peeped.

10:15 Shall the axe boast itself against him that heweth therewith? or
shall the saw magnify itself against him that shaketh it? as if the
rod should shake itself against them that lift it up, or as if the
staff should lift up itself, as if it were no wood.

10:16 Therefore shall the Lord, the Lord of hosts, send among his fat
ones leanness; and under his glory he shall kindle a burning like the
burning of a fire.

10:17 And the light of Israel shall be for a fire, and his Holy One
for a flame: and it shall burn and devour his thorns and his briers in
one day; 10:18 And shall consume the glory of his forest, and of his
fruitful field, both soul and body: and they shall be as when a
standard-bearer fainteth.

10:19 And the rest of the trees of his forest shall be few, that a
child may write them.

10:20 And it shall come to pass in that day, that the remnant of
Israel, and such as are escaped of the house of Jacob, shall no more
again stay upon him that smote them; but shall stay upon the LORD, the
Holy One of Israel, in truth.

10:21 The remnant shall return, even the remnant of Jacob, unto the
mighty God.

10:22 For though thy people Israel be as the sand of the sea, yet a
remnant of them shall return: the consumption decreed shall overflow
with righteousness.

10:23 For the Lord GOD of hosts shall make a consumption, even
determined, in the midst of all the land.

10:24 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD of hosts, O my people that
dwellest in Zion, be not afraid of the Assyrian: he shall smite thee
with a rod, and shall lift up his staff against thee, after the manner
of Egypt.

10:25 For yet a very little while, and the indignation shall cease,
and mine anger in their destruction.

10:26 And the LORD of hosts shall stir up a scourge for him according
to the slaughter of Midian at the rock of Oreb: and as his rod was
upon the sea, so shall he lift it up after the manner of Egypt.

10:27 And it shall come to pass in that day, that his burden shall be
taken away from off thy shoulder, and his yoke from off thy neck, and
the yoke shall be destroyed because of the anointing.

10:28 He is come to Aiath, he is passed to Migron; at Michmash he hath
laid up his carriages: 10:29 They are gone over the passage: they have
taken up their lodging at Geba; Ramah is afraid; Gibeah of Saul is
fled.

10:30 Lift up thy voice, O daughter of Gallim: cause it to be heard
unto Laish, O poor Anathoth.

10:31 Madmenah is removed; the inhabitants of Gebim gather themselves
to flee.

10:32 As yet shall he remain at Nob that day: he shall shake his hand
against the mount of the daughter of Zion, the hill of Jerusalem.

10:33 Behold, the Lord, the LORD of hosts, shall lop the bough with
terror: and the high ones of stature shall be hewn down, and the
haughty shall be humbled.

10:34 And he shall cut down the thickets of the forest with iron, and
Lebanon shall fall by a mighty one.

11:1 And there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a
Branch shall grow out of his roots: 11:2 And the spirit of the LORD
shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the
spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear
of the LORD; 11:3 And shall make him of quick understanding in the
fear of the LORD: and he shall not judge after the sight of his eyes,
neither reprove after the hearing of his ears: 11:4 But with
righteousness shall he judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the
meek of the earth: and he shall smite the earth: with the rod of his
mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked.

11:5 And righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and
faithfulness the girdle of his reins.

11:6 The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall
lie down with the kid; and the calf and the young lion and the fatling
together; and a little child shall lead them.

11:7 And the cow and the bear shall feed; their young ones shall lie
down together: and the lion shall eat straw like the ox.

11:8 And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the
weaned child shall put his hand on the cockatrice' den.

11:9 They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain: for the
earth shall be full of the knowledge of the LORD, as the waters cover
the sea.

11:10 And in that day there shall be a root of Jesse, which shall
stand for an ensign of the people; to it shall the Gentiles seek: and
his rest shall be glorious.

11:11 And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall set
his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his people,
which shall be left, from Assyria, and from Egypt, and from Pathros,
and from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and from Hamath, and
from the islands of the sea.

11:12 And he shall set up an ensign for the nations, and shall
assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of
Judah from the four corners of the earth.

11:13 The envy also of Ephraim shall depart, and the adversaries of
Judah shall be cut off: Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall
not vex Ephraim.

11:14 But they shall fly upon the shoulders of the Philistines toward
the west; they shall spoil them of the east together: they shall lay
their hand upon Edom and Moab; and the children of Ammon shall obey
them.

11:15 And the LORD shall utterly destroy the tongue of the Egyptian
sea; and with his mighty wind shall he shake his hand over the river,
and shall smite it in the seven streams, and make men go over dryshod.

11:16 And there shall be an highway for the remnant of his people,
which shall be left, from Assyria; like as it was to Israel in the day
that he came up out of the land of Egypt.

12:1 And in that day thou shalt say, O LORD, I will praise thee:
though thou wast angry with me, thine anger is turned away, and thou
comfortedst me.

12:2 Behold, God is my salvation; I will trust, and not be afraid: for
the LORD JEHOVAH is my strength and my song; he also is become my
salvation.

12:3 Therefore with joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of
salvation.

12:4 And in that day shall ye say, Praise the LORD, call upon his
name, declare his doings among the people, make mention that his name
is exalted.

12:5 Sing unto the LORD; for he hath done excellent things: this is
known in all the earth.

12:6 Cry out and shout, thou inhabitant of Zion: for great is the Holy
One of Israel in the midst of thee.

13:1 The burden of Babylon, which Isaiah the son of Amoz did see.

13:2 Lift ye up a banner upon the high mountain, exalt the voice unto
them, shake the hand, that they may go into the gates of the nobles.

13:3 I have commanded my sanctified ones, I have also called my mighty
ones for mine anger, even them that rejoice in my highness.

13:4 The noise of a multitude in the mountains, like as of a great
people; a tumultuous noise of the kingdoms of nations gathered
together: the LORD of hosts mustereth the host of the battle.

13:5 They come from a far country, from the end of heaven, even the
LORD, and the weapons of his indignation, to destroy the whole land.

13:6 Howl ye; for the day of the LORD is at hand; it shall come as a
destruction from the Almighty.

13:7 Therefore shall all hands be faint, and every man's heart shall
melt: 13:8 And they shall be afraid: pangs and sorrows shall take hold
of them; they shall be in pain as a woman that travaileth: they shall
be amazed one at another; their faces shall be as flames.

13:9 Behold, the day of the LORD cometh, cruel both with wrath and
fierce anger, to lay the land desolate: and he shall destroy the
sinners thereof out of it.

13:10 For the stars of heaven and the constellations thereof shall not
give their light: the sun shall be darkened in his going forth, and
the moon shall not cause her light to shine.

13:11 And I will punish the world for their evil, and the wicked for
their iniquity; and I will cause the arrogancy of the proud to cease,
and will lay low the haughtiness of the terrible.

13:12 I will make a man more precious than fine gold; even a man than
the golden wedge of Ophir.

13:13 Therefore I will shake the heavens, and the earth shall remove
out of her place, in the wrath of the LORD of hosts, and in the day of
his fierce anger.

13:14 And it shall be as the chased roe, and as a sheep that no man
taketh up: they shall every man turn to his own people, and flee every
one into his own land.

13:15 Every one that is found shall be thrust through; and every one
that is joined unto them shall fall by the sword.

13:16 Their children also shall be dashed to pieces before their eyes;
their houses shall be spoiled, and their wives ravished.

13:17 Behold, I will stir up the Medes against them, which shall not
regard silver; and as for gold, they shall not delight in it.

13:18 Their bows also shall dash the young men to pieces; and they
shall have no pity on the fruit of the womb; their eyes shall not
spare children.

13:19 And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the Chaldees'
excellency, shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah.

13:20 It shall never be inhabited, neither shall it be dwelt in from
generation to generation: neither shall the Arabian pitch tent there;
neither shall the shepherds make their fold there.

13:21 But wild beasts of the desert shall lie there; and their houses
shall be full of doleful creatures; and owls shall dwell there, and
satyrs shall dance there.

13:22 And the wild beasts of the islands shall cry in their desolate
houses, and dragons in their pleasant palaces: and her time is near to
come, and her days shall not be prolonged.

14:1 For the LORD will have mercy on Jacob, and will yet choose
Israel, and set them in their own land: and the strangers shall be
joined with them, and they shall cleave to the house of Jacob.

14:2 And the people shall take them, and bring them to their place:
and the house of Israel shall possess them in the land of the LORD for
servants and handmaids: and they shall take them captives, whose
captives they were; and they shall rule over their oppressors.

14:3 And it shall come to pass in the day that the LORD shall give
thee rest from thy sorrow, and from thy fear, and from the hard
bondage wherein thou wast made to serve, 14:4 That thou shalt take up
this proverb against the king of Babylon, and say, How hath the
oppressor ceased! the golden city ceased!  14:5 The LORD hath broken
the staff of the wicked, and the sceptre of the rulers.

14:6 He who smote the people in wrath with a continual stroke, he that
ruled the nations in anger, is persecuted, and none hindereth.

14:7 The whole earth is at rest, and is quiet: they break forth into
singing.

14:8 Yea, the fir trees rejoice at thee, and the cedars of Lebanon,
saying, Since thou art laid down, no feller is come up against us.

14:9 Hell from beneath is moved for thee to meet thee at thy coming:
it stirreth up the dead for thee, even all the chief ones of the
earth; it hath raised up from their thrones all the kings of the
nations.

14:10 All they shall speak and say unto thee, Art thou also become
weak as we? art thou become like unto us?  14:11 Thy pomp is brought
down to the grave, and the noise of thy viols: the worm is spread
under thee, and the worms cover thee.

14:12 How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning!
how art thou cut down to the ground, which didst weaken the nations!
14:13 For thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I
will exalt my throne above the stars of God: I will sit also upon the
mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north: 14:14 I will
ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like the most High.

14:15 Yet thou shalt be brought down to hell, to the sides of the pit.

14:16 They that see thee shall narrowly look upon thee, and consider
thee, saying, Is this the man that made the earth to tremble, that did
shake kingdoms; 14:17 That made the world as a wilderness, and
destroyed the cities thereof; that opened not the house of his
prisoners?  14:18 All the kings of the nations, even all of them, lie
in glory, every one in his own house.

14:19 But thou art cast out of thy grave like an abominable branch,
and as the raiment of those that are slain, thrust through with a
sword, that go down to the stones of the pit; as a carcase trodden
under feet.

14:20 Thou shalt not be joined with them in burial, because thou hast
destroyed thy land, and slain thy people: the seed of evildoers shall
never be renowned.

14:21 Prepare slaughter for his children for the iniquity of their
fathers; that they do not rise, nor possess the land, nor fill the
face of the world with cities.

14:22 For I will rise up against them, saith the LORD of hosts, and
cut off from Babylon the name, and remnant, and son, and nephew, saith
the LORD.

14:23 I will also make it a possession for the bittern, and pools of
water: and I will sweep it with the besom of destruction, saith the
LORD of hosts.

14:24 The LORD of hosts hath sworn, saying, Surely as I have thought,
so shall it come to pass; and as I have purposed, so shall it stand:
14:25 That I will break the Assyrian in my land, and upon my mountains
tread him under foot: then shall his yoke depart from off them, and
his burden depart from off their shoulders.

14:26 This is the purpose that is purposed upon the whole earth: and
this is the hand that is stretched out upon all the nations.

14:27 For the LORD of hosts hath purposed, and who shall disannul it?
and his hand is stretched out, and who shall turn it back?  14:28 In
the year that king Ahaz died was this burden.

14:29 Rejoice not thou, whole Palestina, because the rod of him that
smote thee is broken: for out of the serpent's root shall come forth a
cockatrice, and his fruit shall be a fiery flying serpent.

14:30 And the firstborn of the poor shall feed, and the needy shall
lie down in safety: and I will kill thy root with famine, and he shall
slay thy remnant.

14:31 Howl, O gate; cry, O city; thou, whole Palestina, art dissolved:
for there shall come from the north a smoke, and none shall be alone
in his appointed times.

14:32 What shall one then answer the messengers of the nation? That
the LORD hath founded Zion, and the poor of his people shall trust in
it.

15:1 The burden of Moab. Because in the night Ar of Moab is laid
waste, and brought to silence; because in the night Kir of Moab is
laid waste, and brought to silence; 15:2 He is gone up to Bajith, and
to Dibon, the high places, to weep: Moab shall howl over Nebo, and
over Medeba: on all their heads shall be baldness, and every beard cut
off.

15:3 In their streets they shall gird themselves with sackcloth: on
the tops of their houses, and in their streets, every one shall howl,
weeping abundantly.

15:4 And Heshbon shall cry, and Elealeh: their voice shall be heard
even unto Jahaz: therefore the armed soldiers of Moab shall cry out;
his life shall be grievous unto him.

15:5 My heart shall cry out for Moab; his fugitives shall flee unto
Zoar, an heifer of three years old: for by the mounting up of Luhith
with weeping shall they go it up; for in the way of Horonaim they
shall raise up a cry of destruction.

15:6 For the waters of Nimrim shall be desolate: for the hay is
withered away, the grass faileth, there is no green thing.

15:7 Therefore the abundance they have gotten, and that which they
have laid up, shall they carry away to the brook of the willows.

15:8 For the cry is gone round about the borders of Moab; the howling
thereof unto Eglaim, and the howling thereof unto Beerelim.

15:9 For the waters of Dimon shall be full of blood: for I will bring
more upon Dimon, lions upon him that escapeth of Moab, and upon the
remnant of the land.

16:1 Send ye the lamb to the ruler of the land from Sela to the
wilderness, unto the mount of the daughter of Zion.

16:2 For it shall be, that, as a wandering bird cast out of the nest,
so the daughters of Moab shall be at the fords of Arnon.

16:3 Take counsel, execute judgment; make thy shadow as the night in
the midst of the noonday; hide the outcasts; bewray not him that
wandereth.

16:4 Let mine outcasts dwell with thee, Moab; be thou a covert to them
from the face of the spoiler: for the extortioner is at an end, the
spoiler ceaseth, the oppressors are consumed out of the land.

16:5 And in mercy shall the throne be established: and he shall sit
upon it in truth in the tabernacle of David, judging, and seeking
judgment, and hasting righteousness.

16:6 We have heard of the pride of Moab; he is very proud: even of his
haughtiness, and his pride, and his wrath: but his lies shall not be
so.

16:7 Therefore shall Moab howl for Moab, every one shall howl: for the
foundations of Kirhareseth shall ye mourn; surely they are stricken.

16:8 For the fields of Heshbon languish, and the vine of Sibmah: the
lords of the heathen have broken down the principal plants thereof,
they are come even unto Jazer, they wandered through the wilderness:
her branches are stretched out, they are gone over the sea.

16:9 Therefore I will bewail with the weeping of Jazer the vine of
Sibmah: I will water thee with my tears, O Heshbon, and Elealeh: for
the shouting for thy summer fruits and for thy harvest is fallen.

16:10 And gladness is taken away, and joy out of the plentiful field;
and in the vineyards there shall be no singing, neither shall there be
shouting: the treaders shall tread out no wine in their presses; I
have made their vintage shouting to cease.

16:11 Wherefore my bowels shall sound like an harp for Moab, and mine
inward parts for Kirharesh.

16:12 And it shall come to pass, when it is seen that Moab is weary on
the high place, that he shall come to his sanctuary to pray; but he
shall not prevail.

16:13 This is the word that the LORD hath spoken concerning Moab since
that time.

16:14 But now the LORD hath spoken, saying, Within three years, as the
years of an hireling, and the glory of Moab shall be contemned, with
all that great multitude; and the remnant shall be very small and
feeble.

17:1 The burden of Damascus. Behold, Damascus is taken away from being
a city, and it shall be a ruinous heap.

17:2 The cities of Aroer are forsaken: they shall be for flocks, which
shall lie down, and none shall make them afraid.

17:3 The fortress also shall cease from Ephraim, and the kingdom from
Damascus, and the remnant of Syria: they shall be as the glory of the
children of Israel, saith the LORD of hosts.

17:4 And in that day it shall come to pass, that the glory of Jacob
shall be made thin, and the fatness of his flesh shall wax lean.

17:5 And it shall be as when the harvestman gathereth the corn, and
reapeth the ears with his arm; and it shall be as he that gathereth
ears in the valley of Rephaim.

17:6 Yet gleaning grapes shall be left in it, as the shaking of an
olive tree, two or three berries in the top of the uppermost bough,
four or five in the outmost fruitful branches thereof, saith the LORD
God of Israel.

17:7 At that day shall a man look to his Maker, and his eyes shall
have respect to the Holy One of Israel.

17:8 And he shall not look to the altars, the work of his hands,
neither shall respect that which his fingers have made, either the
groves, or the images.

17:9 In that day shall his strong cities be as a forsaken bough, and
an uppermost branch, which they left because of the children of
Israel: and there shall be desolation.

17:10 Because thou hast forgotten the God of thy salvation, and hast
not been mindful of the rock of thy strength, therefore shalt thou
plant pleasant plants, and shalt set it with strange slips: 17:11 In
the day shalt thou make thy plant to grow, and in the morning shalt
thou make thy seed to flourish: but the harvest shall be a heap in the
day of grief and of desperate sorrow.

17:12 Woe to the multitude of many people, which make a noise like the
noise of the seas; and to the rushing of nations, that make a rushing
like the rushing of mighty waters!  17:13 The nations shall rush like
the rushing of many waters: but God shall rebuke them, and they shall
flee far off, and shall be chased as the chaff of the mountains before
the wind, and like a rolling thing before the whirlwind.

17:14 And behold at eveningtide trouble; and before the morning he is
not.

This is the portion of them that spoil us, and the lot of them that
rob us.

18:1 Woe to the land shadowing with wings, which is beyond the rivers
of Ethiopia: 18:2 That sendeth ambassadors by the sea, even in vessels
of bulrushes upon the waters, saying, Go, ye swift messengers, to a
nation scattered and peeled, to a people terrible from their beginning
hitherto; a nation meted out and trodden down, whose land the rivers
have spoiled!  18:3 All ye inhabitants of the world, and dwellers on
the earth, see ye, when he lifteth up an ensign on the mountains; and
when he bloweth a trumpet, hear ye.

18:4 For so the LORD said unto me, I will take my rest, and I will
consider in my dwelling place like a clear heat upon herbs, and like a
cloud of dew in the heat of harvest.

18:5 For afore the harvest, when the bud is perfect, and the sour
grape is ripening in the flower, he shall both cut off the sprigs with
pruning hooks, and take away and cut down the branches.

18:6 They shall be left together unto the fowls of the mountains, and
to the beasts of the earth: and the fowls shall summer upon them, and
all the beasts of the earth shall winter upon them.

18:7 In that time shall the present be brought unto the LORD of hosts
of a people scattered and peeled, and from a people terrible from
their beginning hitherto; a nation meted out and trodden under foot,
whose land the rivers have spoiled, to the place of the name of the
LORD of hosts, the mount Zion.

19:1 The burden of Egypt. Behold, the LORD rideth upon a swift cloud,
and shall come into Egypt: and the idols of Egypt shall be moved at
his presence, and the heart of Egypt shall melt in the midst of it.

19:2 And I will set the Egyptians against the Egyptians: and they
shall fight every one against his brother, and every one against his
neighbour; city against city, and kingdom against kingdom.

19:3 And the spirit of Egypt shall fail in the midst thereof; and I
will destroy the counsel thereof: and they shall seek to the idols,
and to the charmers, and to them that have familiar spirits, and to
the wizards.

19:4 And the Egyptians will I give over into the hand of a cruel lord;
and a fierce king shall rule over them, saith the Lord, the LORD of
hosts.

19:5 And the waters shall fail from the sea, and the river shall be
wasted and dried up.

19:6 And they shall turn the rivers far away; and the brooks of
defence shall be emptied and dried up: the reeds and flags shall
wither.

19:7 The paper reeds by the brooks, by the mouth of the brooks, and
every thing sown by the brooks, shall wither, be driven away, and be
no more.

19:8 The fishers also shall mourn, and all they that cast angle into
the brooks shall lament, and they that spread nets upon the waters
shall languish.

19:9 Moreover they that work in fine flax, and they that weave
networks, shall be confounded.

19:10 And they shall be broken in the purposes thereof, all that make
sluices and ponds for fish.

19:11 Surely the princes of Zoan are fools, the counsel of the wise
counsellors of Pharaoh is become brutish: how say ye unto Pharaoh, I
am the son of the wise, the son of ancient kings?  19:12 Where are
they? where are thy wise men? and let them tell thee now, and let them
know what the LORD of hosts hath purposed upon Egypt.

19:13 The princes of Zoan are become fools, the princes of Noph are
deceived; they have also seduced Egypt, even they that are the stay of
the tribes thereof.

19:14 The LORD hath mingled a perverse spirit in the midst thereof:
and they have caused Egypt to err in every work thereof, as a drunken
man staggereth in his vomit.

19:15 Neither shall there be any work for Egypt, which the head or
tail, branch or rush, may do.

19:16 In that day shall Egypt be like unto women: and it shall be
afraid and fear because of the shaking of the hand of the LORD of
hosts, which he shaketh over it.

19:17 And the land of Judah shall be a terror unto Egypt, every one
that maketh mention thereof shall be afraid in himself, because of the
counsel of the LORD of hosts, which he hath determined against it.

19:18 In that day shall five cities in the land of Egypt speak the
language of Canaan, and swear to the LORD of hosts; one shall be
called, The city of destruction.

19:19 In that day shall there be an altar to the LORD in the midst of
the land of Egypt, and a pillar at the border thereof to the LORD.

19:20 And it shall be for a sign and for a witness unto the LORD of
hosts in the land of Egypt: for they shall cry unto the LORD because
of the oppressors, and he shall send them a saviour, and a great one,
and he shall deliver them.

19:21 And the LORD shall be known to Egypt, and the Egyptians shall
know the LORD in that day, and shall do sacrifice and oblation; yea,
they shall vow a vow unto the LORD, and perform it.

19:22 And the LORD shall smite Egypt: he shall smite and heal it: and
they shall return even to the LORD, and he shall be intreated of them,
and shall heal them.

19:23 In that day shall there be a highway out of Egypt to Assyria,
and the Assyrian shall come into Egypt, and the Egyptian into Assyria,
and the Egyptians shall serve with the Assyrians.

19:24 In that day shall Israel be the third with Egypt and with
Assyria, even a blessing in the midst of the land: 19:25 Whom the LORD
of hosts shall bless, saying, Blessed be Egypt my people, and Assyria
the work of my hands, and Israel mine inheritance.

20:1 In the year that Tartan came unto Ashdod, (when Sargon the king
of Assyria sent him,) and fought against Ashdod, and took it; 20:2 At
the same time spake the LORD by Isaiah the son of Amoz, saying, Go and
loose the sackcloth from off thy loins, and put off thy shoe from thy
foot. And he did so, walking naked and barefoot.

20:3 And the LORD said, Like as my servant Isaiah hath walked naked
and barefoot three years for a sign and wonder upon Egypt and upon
Ethiopia; 20:4 So shall the king of Assyria lead away the Egyptians
prisoners, and the Ethiopians captives, young and old, naked and
barefoot, even with their buttocks uncovered, to the shame of Egypt.

20:5 And they shall be afraid and ashamed of Ethiopia their
expectation, and of Egypt their glory.

20:6 And the inhabitant of this isle shall say in that day, Behold,
such is our expectation, whither we flee for help to be delivered from
the king of Assyria: and how shall we escape?  21:1 The burden of the
desert of the sea. As whirlwinds in the south pass through; so it
cometh from the desert, from a terrible land.

21:2 A grievous vision is declared unto me; the treacherous dealer
dealeth treacherously, and the spoiler spoileth. Go up, O Elam:
besiege, O Media; all the sighing thereof have I made to cease.

21:3 Therefore are my loins filled with pain: pangs have taken hold
upon me, as the pangs of a woman that travaileth: I was bowed down at
the hearing of it; I was dismayed at the seeing of it.

21:4 My heart panted, fearfulness affrighted me: the night of my
pleasure hath he turned into fear unto me.

21:5 Prepare the table, watch in the watchtower, eat, drink: arise, ye
princes, and anoint the shield.

21:6 For thus hath the LORD said unto me, Go, set a watchman, let him
declare what he seeth.

21:7 And he saw a chariot with a couple of horsemen, a chariot of
asses, and a chariot of camels; and he hearkened diligently with much
heed: 21:8 And he cried, A lion: My lord, I stand continually upon the
watchtower in the daytime, and I am set in my ward whole nights: 21:9
And, behold, here cometh a chariot of men, with a couple of horsemen.

And he answered and said, Babylon is fallen, is fallen; and all the
graven images of her gods he hath broken unto the ground.

21:10 O my threshing, and the corn of my floor: that which I have
heard of the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, have I declared unto
you.

21:11 The burden of Dumah. He calleth to me out of Seir, Watchman,
what of the night? Watchman, what of the night?  21:12 The watchman
said, The morning cometh, and also the night: if ye will enquire,
enquire ye: return, come.

21:13 The burden upon Arabia. In the forest in Arabia shall ye lodge,
O ye travelling companies of Dedanim.

21:14 The inhabitants of the land of Tema brought water to him that
was thirsty, they prevented with their bread him that fled.

21:15 For they fled from the swords, from the drawn sword, and from
the bent bow, and from the grievousness of war.

21:16 For thus hath the LORD said unto me, Within a year, according to
the years of an hireling, and all the glory of Kedar shall fail: 21:17
And the residue of the number of archers, the mighty men of the
children of Kedar, shall be diminished: for the LORD God of Israel
hath spoken it.

22:1 The burden of the valley of vision. What aileth thee now, that
thou art wholly gone up to the housetops?  22:2 Thou that art full of
stirs, a tumultuous city, joyous city: thy slain men are not slain
with the sword, nor dead in battle.

22:3 All thy rulers are fled together, they are bound by the archers:
all that are found in thee are bound together, which have fled from
far.

22:4 Therefore said I, Look away from me; I will weep bitterly, labour
not to comfort me, because of the spoiling of the daughter of my
people.

22:5 For it is a day of trouble, and of treading down, and of
perplexity by the Lord GOD of hosts in the valley of vision, breaking
down the walls, and of crying to the mountains.

22:6 And Elam bare the quiver with chariots of men and horsemen, and
Kir uncovered the shield.

22:7 And it shall come to pass, that thy choicest valleys shall be
full of chariots, and the horsemen shall set themselves in array at
the gate.

22:8 And he discovered the covering of Judah, and thou didst look in
that day to the armour of the house of the forest.

22:9 Ye have seen also the breaches of the city of David, that they
are many: and ye gathered together the waters of the lower pool.

22:10 And ye have numbered the houses of Jerusalem, and the houses
have ye broken down to fortify the wall.

22:11 Ye made also a ditch between the two walls for the water of the
old pool: but ye have not looked unto the maker thereof, neither had
respect unto him that fashioned it long ago.

22:12 And in that day did the Lord GOD of hosts call to weeping, and
to mourning, and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth: 22:13 And
behold joy and gladness, slaying oxen, and killing sheep, eating
flesh, and drinking wine: let us eat and drink; for to morrow we shall
die.

22:14 And it was revealed in mine ears by the LORD of hosts, Surely
this iniquity shall not be purged from you till ye die, saith the Lord
GOD of hosts.

22:15 Thus saith the Lord GOD of hosts, Go, get thee unto this
treasurer, even unto Shebna, which is over the house, and say, 22:16
What hast thou here? and whom hast thou here, that thou hast hewed
thee out a sepulchre here, as he that heweth him out a sepulchre on
high, and that graveth an habitation for himself in a rock?  22:17
Behold, the LORD will carry thee away with a mighty captivity, and
will surely cover thee.

22:18 He will surely violently turn and toss thee like a ball into a
large country: there shalt thou die, and there the chariots of thy
glory shall be the shame of thy lord's house.

22:19 And I will drive thee from thy station, and from thy state shall
he pull thee down.

22:20 And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will call my
servant Eliakim the son of Hilkiah: 22:21 And I will clothe him with
thy robe, and strengthen him with thy girdle, and I will commit thy
government into his hand: and he shall be a father to the inhabitants
of Jerusalem, and to the house of Judah.

22:22 And the key of the house of David will I lay upon his shoulder;
so he shall open, and none shall shut; and he shall shut, and none
shall open.

22:23 And I will fasten him as a nail in a sure place; and he shall be
for a glorious throne to his father's house.

22:24 And they shall hang upon him all the glory of his father's
house, the offspring and the issue, all vessels of small quantity,
from the vessels of cups, even to all the vessels of flagons.

22:25 In that day, saith the LORD of hosts, shall the nail that is
fastened in the sure place be removed, and be cut down, and fall; and
the burden that was upon it shall be cut off: for the LORD hath spoken
it.

23:1 The burden of Tyre. Howl, ye ships of Tarshish; for it is laid
waste, so that there is no house, no entering in: from the land of
Chittim it is revealed to them.

23:2 Be still, ye inhabitants of the isle; thou whom the merchants of
Zidon, that pass over the sea, have replenished.

23:3 And by great waters the seed of Sihor, the harvest of the river,
is her revenue; and she is a mart of nations.

23:4 Be thou ashamed, O Zidon: for the sea hath spoken, even the
strength of the sea, saying, I travail not, nor bring forth children,
neither do I nourish up young men, nor bring up virgins.

23:5 As at the report concerning Egypt, so shall they be sorely pained
at the report of Tyre.

23:6 Pass ye over to Tarshish; howl, ye inhabitants of the isle.

23:7 Is this your joyous city, whose antiquity is of ancient days? her
own feet shall carry her afar off to sojourn.

23:8 Who hath taken this counsel against Tyre, the crowning city,
whose merchants are princes, whose traffickers are the honourable of
the earth?  23:9 The LORD of hosts hath purposed it, to stain the
pride of all glory, and to bring into contempt all the honourable of
the earth.

23:10 Pass through thy land as a river, O daughter of Tarshish: there
is no more strength.

23:11 He stretched out his hand over the sea, he shook the kingdoms:
the LORD hath given a commandment against the merchant city, to
destroy the strong holds thereof.

23:12 And he said, Thou shalt no more rejoice, O thou oppressed
virgin, daughter of Zidon: arise, pass over to Chittim; there also
shalt thou have no rest.

23:13 Behold the land of the Chaldeans; this people was not, till the
Assyrian founded it for them that dwell in the wilderness: they set up
the towers thereof, they raised up the palaces thereof; and he brought
it to ruin.

23:14 Howl, ye ships of Tarshish: for your strength is laid waste.

23:15 And it shall come to pass in that day, that Tyre shall be
forgotten seventy years, according to the days of one king: after the
end of seventy years shall Tyre sing as an harlot.

23:16 Take an harp, go about the city, thou harlot that hast been
forgotten; make sweet melody, sing many songs, that thou mayest be
remembered.

23:17 And it shall come to pass after the end of seventy years, that
the LORD will visit Tyre, and she shall turn to her hire, and shall
commit fornication with all the kingdoms of the world upon the face of
the earth.

23:18 And her merchandise and her hire shall be holiness to the LORD:
it shall not be treasured nor laid up; for her merchandise shall be
for them that dwell before the LORD, to eat sufficiently, and for
durable clothing.

24:1 Behold, the LORD maketh the earth empty, and maketh it waste, and
turneth it upside down, and scattereth abroad the inhabitants thereof.

24:2 And it shall be, as with the people, so with the priest; as with
the servant, so with his master; as with the maid, so with her
mistress; as with the buyer, so with the seller; as with the lender,
so with the borrower; as with the taker of usury, so with the giver of
usury to him.

24:3 The land shall be utterly emptied, and utterly spoiled: for the
LORD hath spoken this word.

24:4 The earth mourneth and fadeth away, the world languisheth and
fadeth away, the haughty people of the earth do languish.

24:5 The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because
they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the
everlasting covenant.

24:6 Therefore hath the curse devoured the earth, and they that dwell
therein are desolate: therefore the inhabitants of the earth are
burned, and few men left.

24:7 The new wine mourneth, the vine languisheth, all the merryhearted
do sigh.

24:8 The mirth of tabrets ceaseth, the noise of them that rejoice
endeth, the joy of the harp ceaseth.

24:9 They shall not drink wine with a song; strong drink shall be
bitter to them that drink it.

24:10 The city of confusion is broken down: every house is shut up,
that no man may come in.

24:11 There is a crying for wine in the streets; all joy is darkened,
the mirth of the land is gone.

24:12 In the city is left desolation, and the gate is smitten with
destruction.

24:13 When thus it shall be in the midst of the land among the people,
there shall be as the shaking of an olive tree, and as the gleaning
grapes when the vintage is done.

24:14 They shall lift up their voice, they shall sing for the majesty
of the LORD, they shall cry aloud from the sea.

24:15 Wherefore glorify ye the LORD in the fires, even the name of the
LORD God of Israel in the isles of the sea.

24:16 From the uttermost part of the earth have we heard songs, even
glory to the righteous. But I said, My leanness, my leanness, woe unto
me! the treacherous dealers have dealt treacherously; yea, the
treacherous dealers have dealt very treacherously.

24:17 Fear, and the pit, and the snare, are upon thee, O inhabitant of
the earth.

24:18 And it shall come to pass, that he who fleeth from the noise of
the fear shall fall into the pit; and he that cometh up out of the
midst of the pit shall be taken in the snare: for the windows from on
high are open, and the foundations of the earth do shake.

24:19 The earth is utterly broken down, the earth is clean dissolved,
the earth is moved exceedingly.

24:20 The earth shall reel to and fro like a drunkard, and shall be
removed like a cottage; and the transgression thereof shall be heavy
upon it; and it shall fall, and not rise again.

24:21 And it shall come to pass in that day, that the LORD shall
punish the host of the high ones that are on high, and the kings of
the earth upon the earth.

24:22 And they shall be gathered together, as prisoners are gathered
in the pit, and shall be shut up in the prison, and after many days
shall they be visited.

24:23 Then the moon shall be confounded, and the sun ashamed, when the
LORD of hosts shall reign in mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, and before
his ancients gloriously.

25:1 O Lord, thou art my God; I will exalt thee, I will praise thy
name; for thou hast done wonderful things; thy counsels of old are
faithfulness and truth.

25:2 For thou hast made of a city an heap; of a defenced city a ruin:
a palace of strangers to be no city; it shall never be built.

25:3 Therefore shall the strong people glorify thee, the city of the
terrible nations shall fear thee.

25:4 For thou hast been a strength to the poor, a strength to the
needy in his distress, a refuge from the storm, a shadow from the
heat, when the blast of the terrible ones is as a storm against the
wall.

25:5 Thou shalt bring down the noise of strangers, as the heat in a
dry place; even the heat with the shadow of a cloud: the branch of the
terrible ones shall be brought low.

25:6 And in this mountain shall the LORD of hosts make unto all people
a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the lees, of fat things
full of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined.

25:7 And he will destroy in this mountain the face of the covering
cast over all people, and the vail that is spread over all nations.

25:8 He will swallow up death in victory; and the Lord GOD will wipe
away tears from off all faces; and the rebuke of his people shall he
take away from off all the earth: for the LORD hath spoken it.

25:9 And it shall be said in that day, Lo, this is our God; we have
waited for him, and he will save us: this is the LORD; we have waited
for him, we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation.

25:10 For in this mountain shall the hand of the LORD rest, and Moab
shall be trodden down under him, even as straw is trodden down for the
dunghill.

25:11 And he shall spread forth his hands in the midst of them, as he
that swimmeth spreadeth forth his hands to swim: and he shall bring
down their pride together with the spoils of their hands.

25:12 And the fortress of the high fort of thy walls shall he bring
down, lay low, and bring to the ground, even to the dust.

26:1 In that day shall this song be sung in the land of Judah; We have
a strong city; salvation will God appoint for walls and bulwarks.

26:2 Open ye the gates, that the righteous nation which keepeth the
truth may enter in.

26:3 Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on
thee: because he trusteth in thee.

26:4 Trust ye in the LORD for ever: for in the LORD JEHOVAH is
everlasting strength: 26:5 For he bringeth down them that dwell on
high; the lofty city, he layeth it low; he layeth it low, even to the
ground; he bringeth it even to the dust.

26:6 The foot shall tread it down, even the feet of the poor, and the
steps of the needy.

26:7 The way of the just is uprightness: thou, most upright, dost
weigh the path of the just.

26:8 Yea, in the way of thy judgments, O LORD, have we waited for
thee; the desire of our soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of
thee.

26:9 With my soul have I desired thee in the night; yea, with my
spirit within me will I seek thee early: for when thy judgments are in
the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness.

26:10 Let favour be shewed to the wicked, yet will he not learn
righteousness: in the land of uprightness will he deal unjustly, and
will not behold the majesty of the LORD.

26:11 LORD, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see: but they
shall see, and be ashamed for their envy at the people; yea, the fire
of thine enemies shall devour them.

26:12 LORD, thou wilt ordain peace for us: for thou also hast wrought
all our works in us.

26:13 O LORD our God, other lords beside thee have had dominion over
us: but by thee only will we make mention of thy name.

26:14 They are dead, they shall not live; they are deceased, they
shall not rise: therefore hast thou visited and destroyed them, and
made all their memory to perish.

26:15 Thou hast increased the nation, O LORD, thou hast increased the
nation: thou art glorified: thou hadst removed it far unto all the
ends of the earth.

26:16 LORD, in trouble have they visited thee, they poured out a
prayer when thy chastening was upon them.

26:17 Like as a woman with child, that draweth near the time of her
delivery, is in pain, and crieth out in her pangs; so have we been in
thy sight, O LORD.

26:18 We have been with child, we have been in pain, we have as it
were brought forth wind; we have not wrought any deliverance in the
earth; neither have the inhabitants of the world fallen.

26:19 Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they
arise. Awake and sing, ye that dwell in dust: for thy dew is as the
dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead.

26:20 Come, my people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy
doors about thee: hide thyself as it were for a little moment, until
the indignation be overpast.

26:21 For, behold, the LORD cometh out of his place to punish the
inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity: the earth also shall
disclose her blood, and shall no more cover her slain.

27:1 In that day the LORD with his sore and great and strong sword
shall punish leviathan the piercing serpent, even leviathan that
crooked serpent; and he shall slay the dragon that is in the sea.

27:2 In that day sing ye unto her, A vineyard of red wine.

27:3 I the LORD do keep it; I will water it every moment: lest any
hurt it, I will keep it night and day.

27:4 Fury is not in me: who would set the briers and thorns against me
in battle? I would go through them, I would burn them together.

27:5 Or let him take hold of my strength, that he may make peace with
me; and he shall make peace with me.

27:6 He shall cause them that come of Jacob to take root: Israel shall
blossom and bud, and fill the face of the world with fruit.

27:7 Hath he smitten him, as he smote those that smote him? or is he
slain according to the slaughter of them that are slain by him?  27:8
In measure, when it shooteth forth, thou wilt debate with it: he
stayeth his rough wind in the day of the east wind.

27:9 By this therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged; and this
is all the fruit to take away his sin; when he maketh all the stones
of the altar as chalkstones that are beaten in sunder, the groves and
images shall not stand up.

27:10 Yet the defenced city shall be desolate, and the habitation
forsaken, and left like a wilderness: there shall the calf feed, and
there shall he lie down, and consume the branches thereof.

27:11 When the boughs thereof are withered, they shall be broken off:
the women come, and set them on fire: for it is a people of no
understanding: therefore he that made them will not have mercy on
them, and he that formed them will shew them no favour.

27:12 And it shall come to pass in that day, that the LORD shall beat
off from the channel of the river unto the stream of Egypt, and ye
shall be gathered one by one, O ye children of Israel.

27:13 And it shall come to pass in that day, that the great trumpet
shall be blown, and they shall come which were ready to perish in the
land of Assyria, and the outcasts in the land of Egypt, and shall
worship the LORD in the holy mount at Jerusalem.

28:1 Woe to the crown of pride, to the drunkards of Ephraim, whose
glorious beauty is a fading flower, which are on the head of the fat
valleys of them that are overcome with wine!  28:2 Behold, the Lord
hath a mighty and strong one, which as a tempest of hail and a
destroying storm, as a flood of mighty waters overflowing, shall cast
down to the earth with the hand.

28:3 The crown of pride, the drunkards of Ephraim, shall be trodden
under feet: 28:4 And the glorious beauty, which is on the head of the
fat valley, shall be a fading flower, and as the hasty fruit before
the summer; which when he that looketh upon it seeth, while it is yet
in his hand he eateth it up.

28:5 In that day shall the LORD of hosts be for a crown of glory, and
for a diadem of beauty, unto the residue of his people, 28:6 And for a
spirit of judgment to him that sitteth in judgment, and for strength
to them that turn the battle to the gate.

28:7 But they also have erred through wine, and through strong drink
are out of the way; the priest and the prophet have erred through
strong drink, they are swallowed up of wine, they are out of the way
through strong drink; they err in vision, they stumble in judgment.

28:8 For all tables are full of vomit and filthiness, so that there is
no place clean.

28:9 Whom shall he teach knowledge? and whom shall he make to
understand doctrine? them that are weaned from the milk, and drawn
from the breasts.

28:10 For precept must be upon precept, precept upon precept; line
upon line, line upon line; here a little, and there a little: 28:11
For with stammering lips and another tongue will he speak to this
people.

28:12 To whom he said, This is the rest wherewith ye may cause the
weary to rest; and this is the refreshing: yet they would not hear.

28:13 But the word of the LORD was unto them precept upon precept,
precept upon precept; line upon line, line upon line; here a little,
and there a little; that they might go, and fall backward, and be
broken, and snared, and taken.

28:14 Wherefore hear the word of the LORD, ye scornful men, that rule
this people which is in Jerusalem.

28:15 Because ye have said, We have made a covenant with death, and
with hell are we at agreement; when the overflowing scourge shall pass
through, it shall not come unto us: for we have made lies our refuge,
and under falsehood have we hid ourselves: 28:16 Therefore thus saith
the Lord GOD, Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation a stone, a tried
stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation: he that believeth
shall not make haste.

28:17 Judgment also will I lay to the line, and righteousness to the
plummet: and the hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies, and the
waters shall overflow the hiding place.

28:18 And your covenant with death shall be disannulled, and your
agreement with hell shall not stand; when the overflowing scourge
shall pass through, then ye shall be trodden down by it.

28:19 From the time that it goeth forth it shall take you: for morning
by morning shall it pass over, by day and by night: and it shall be a
vexation only to understand the report.

28:20 For the bed is shorter than that a man can stretch himself on
it: and the covering narrower than that he can wrap himself in it.

28:21 For the LORD shall rise up as in mount Perazim, he shall be
wroth as in the valley of Gibeon, that he may do his work, his strange
work; and bring to pass his act, his strange act.

28:22 Now therefore be ye not mockers, lest your bands be made strong:
for I have heard from the Lord GOD of hosts a consumption, even
determined upon the whole earth.

28:23 Give ye ear, and hear my voice; hearken, and hear my speech.

28:24 Doth the plowman plow all day to sow? doth he open and break the
clods of his ground?  28:25 When he hath made plain the face thereof,
doth he not cast abroad the fitches, and scatter the cummin, and cast
in the principal wheat and the appointed barley and the rie in their
place?  28:26 For his God doth instruct him to discretion, and doth
teach him.

28:27 For the fitches are not threshed with a threshing instrument,
neither is a cart wheel turned about upon the cummin; but the fitches
are beaten out with a staff, and the cummin with a rod.

28:28 Bread corn is bruised; because he will not ever be threshing it,
nor break it with the wheel of his cart, nor bruise it with his
horsemen.

28:29 This also cometh forth from the LORD of hosts, which is
wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working.

29:1 Woe to Ariel, to Ariel, the city where David dwelt! add ye year
to year; let them kill sacrifices.

29:2 Yet I will distress Ariel, and there shall be heaviness and
sorrow: and it shall be unto me as Ariel.

29:3 And I will camp against thee round about, and will lay siege
against thee with a mount, and I will raise forts against thee.

29:4 And thou shalt be brought down, and shalt speak out of the
ground, and thy speech shall be low out of the dust, and thy voice
shall be, as of one that hath a familiar spirit, out of the ground,
and thy speech shall whisper out of the dust.

29:5 Moreover the multitude of thy strangers shall be like small dust,
and the multitude of the terrible ones shall be as chaff that passeth
away: yea, it shall be at an instant suddenly.

29:6 Thou shalt be visited of the LORD of hosts with thunder, and with
earthquake, and great noise, with storm and tempest, and the flame of
devouring fire.

29:7 And the multitude of all the nations that fight against Ariel,
even all that fight against her and her munition, and that distress
her, shall be as a dream of a night vision.

29:8 It shall even be as when an hungry man dreameth, and, behold, he
eateth; but he awaketh, and his soul is empty: or as when a thirsty
man dreameth, and, behold, he drinketh; but he awaketh, and, behold,
he is faint, and his soul hath appetite: so shall the multitude of all
the nations be, that fight against mount Zion.

29:9 Stay yourselves, and wonder; cry ye out, and cry: they are
drunken, but not with wine; they stagger, but not with strong drink.

29:10 For the LORD hath poured out upon you the spirit of deep sleep,
and hath closed your eyes: the prophets and your rulers, the seers
hath he covered.

29:11 And the vision of all is become unto you as the words of a book
that is sealed, which men deliver to one that is learned, saying, Read
this, I pray thee: and he saith, I cannot; for it is sealed: 29:12 And
the book is delivered to him that is not learned, saying, Read this, I
pray thee: and he saith, I am not learned.

29:13 Wherefore the Lord said, Forasmuch as this people draw near me
with their mouth, and with their lips do honour me, but have removed
their heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the
precept of men: 29:14 Therefore, behold, I will proceed to do a
marvellous work among this people, even a marvellous work and a
wonder: for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the
understanding of their prudent men shall be hid.

29:15 Woe unto them that seek deep to hide their counsel from the
LORD, and their works are in the dark, and they say, Who seeth us? and
who knoweth us?  29:16 Surely your turning of things upside down shall
be esteemed as the potter's clay: for shall the work say of him that
made it, He made me not? or shall the thing framed say of him that
framed it, He had no understanding?  29:17 Is it not yet a very little
while, and Lebanon shall be turned into a fruitful field, and the
fruitful field shall be esteemed as a forest?  29:18 And in that day
shall the deaf hear the words of the book, and the eyes of the blind
shall see out of obscurity, and out of darkness.

29:19 The meek also shall increase their joy in the LORD, and the poor
among men shall rejoice in the Holy One of Israel.

29:20 For the terrible one is brought to nought, and the scorner is
consumed, and all that watch for iniquity are cut off: 29:21 That make
a man an offender for a word, and lay a snare for him that reproveth
in the gate, and turn aside the just for a thing of nought.

29:22 Therefore thus saith the LORD, who redeemed Abraham, concerning
the house of Jacob, Jacob shall not now be ashamed, neither shall his
face now wax pale.

29:23 But when he seeth his children, the work of mine hands, in the
midst of him, they shall sanctify my name, and sanctify the Holy One
of Jacob, and shall fear the God of Israel.

29:24 They also that erred in spirit shall come to understanding, and
they that murmured shall learn doctrine.

30:1 Woe to the rebellious children, saith the LORD, that take
counsel, but not of me; and that cover with a covering, but not of my
spirit, that they may add sin to sin: 30:2 That walk to go down into
Egypt, and have not asked at my mouth; to strengthen themselves in the
strength of Pharaoh, and to trust in the shadow of Egypt!  30:3
Therefore shall the strength of Pharaoh be your shame, and the trust
in the shadow of Egypt your confusion.

30:4 For his princes were at Zoan, and his ambassadors came to Hanes.

30:5 They were all ashamed of a people that could not profit them, nor
be an help nor profit, but a shame, and also a reproach.

30:6 The burden of the beasts of the south: into the land of trouble
and anguish, from whence come the young and old lion, the viper and
fiery flying serpent, they will carry their riches upon the shoulders
of young asses, and their treasures upon the bunches of camels, to a
people that shall not profit them.

30:7 For the Egyptians shall help in vain, and to no purpose:
therefore have I cried concerning this, Their strength is to sit
still.

30:8 Now go, write it before them in a table, and note it in a book,
that it may be for the time to come for ever and ever: 30:9 That this
is a rebellious people, lying children, children that will not hear
the law of the LORD: 30:10 Which say to the seers, See not; and to the
prophets, Prophesy not unto us right things, speak unto us smooth
things, prophesy deceits: 30:11 Get you out of the way, turn aside out
of the path, cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from before us.

30:12 Wherefore thus saith the Holy One of Israel, Because ye despise
this word, and trust in oppression and perverseness, and stay thereon:
30:13 Therefore this iniquity shall be to you as a breach ready to
fall, swelling out in a high wall, whose breaking cometh suddenly at
an instant.

30:14 And he shall break it as the breaking of the potters' vessel
that is broken in pieces; he shall not spare: so that there shall not
be found in the bursting of it a sherd to take fire from the hearth,
or to take water withal out of the pit.

30:15 For thus saith the Lord GOD, the Holy One of Israel; In
returning and rest shall ye be saved; in quietness and in confidence
shall be your strength: and ye would not.

30:16 But ye said, No; for we will flee upon horses; therefore shall
ye flee: and, We will ride upon the swift; therefore shall they that
pursue you be swift.

30:17 One thousand shall flee at the rebuke of one; at the rebuke of
five shall ye flee: till ye be left as a beacon upon the top of a
mountain, and as an ensign on an hill.

30:18 And therefore will the LORD wait, that he may be gracious unto
you, and therefore will he be exalted, that he may have mercy upon
you: for the LORD is a God of judgment: blessed are all they that wait
for him.

30:19 For the people shall dwell in Zion at Jerusalem: thou shalt weep
no more: he will be very gracious unto thee at the voice of thy cry;
when he shall hear it, he will answer thee.

30:20 And though the Lord give you the bread of adversity, and the
water of affliction, yet shall not thy teachers be removed into a
corner any more, but thine eyes shall see thy teachers: 30:21 And
thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This is the way,
walk ye in it, when ye turn to the right hand, and when ye turn to the
left.

30:22 Ye shall defile also the covering of thy graven images of
silver, and the ornament of thy molten images of gold: thou shalt cast
them away as a menstruous cloth; thou shalt say unto it, Get thee
hence.

30:23 Then shall he give the rain of thy seed, that thou shalt sow the
ground withal; and bread of the increase of the earth, and it shall be
fat and plenteous: in that day shall thy cattle feed in large
pastures.

30:24 The oxen likewise and the young asses that ear the ground shall
eat clean provender, which hath been winnowed with the shovel and with
the fan.

30:25 And there shall be upon every high mountain, and upon every high
hill, rivers and streams of waters in the day of the great slaughter,
when the towers fall.

30:26 Moreover the light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun,
and the light of the sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of seven
days, in the day that the LORD bindeth up the breach of his people,
and healeth the stroke of their wound.

30:27 Behold, the name of the LORD cometh from far, burning with his
anger, and the burden thereof is heavy: his lips are full of
indignation, and his tongue as a devouring fire: 30:28 And his breath,
as an overflowing stream, shall reach to the midst of the neck, to
sift the nations with the sieve of vanity: and there shall be a bridle
in the jaws of the people, causing them to err.

30:29 Ye shall have a song, as in the night when a holy solemnity is
kept; and gladness of heart, as when one goeth with a pipe to come
into the mountain of the LORD, to the mighty One of Israel.

30:30 And the LORD shall cause his glorious voice to be heard, and
shall shew the lighting down of his arm, with the indignation of his
anger, and with the flame of a devouring fire, with scattering, and
tempest, and hailstones.

30:31 For through the voice of the LORD shall the Assyrian be beaten
down, which smote with a rod.

30:32 And in every place where the grounded staff shall pass, which
the LORD shall lay upon him, it shall be with tabrets and harps: and
in battles of shaking will he fight with it.

30:33 For Tophet is ordained of old; yea, for the king it is prepared;
he hath made it deep and large: the pile thereof is fire and much
wood; the breath of the LORD, like a stream of brimstone, doth kindle
it.

31:1 Woe to them that go down to Egypt for help; and stay on horses,
and trust in chariots, because they are many; and in horsemen, because
they are very strong; but they look not unto the Holy One of Israel,
neither seek the LORD!  31:2 Yet he also is wise, and will bring evil,
and will not call back his words: but will arise against the house of
the evildoers, and against the help of them that work iniquity.

31:3 Now the Egyptians are men, and not God; and their horses flesh,
and not spirit. When the LORD shall stretch out his hand, both he that
helpeth shall fall, and he that is holpen shall fall down, and they
all shall fail together.

31:4 For thus hath the LORD spoken unto me, Like as the lion and the
young lion roaring on his prey, when a multitude of shepherds is
called forth against him, he will not be afraid of their voice, nor
abase himself for the noise of them: so shall the LORD of hosts come
down to fight for mount Zion, and for the hill thereof.

31:5 As birds flying, so will the LORD of hosts defend Jerusalem;
defending also he will deliver it; and passing over he will preserve
it.

31:6 Turn ye unto him from whom the children of Israel have deeply
revolted.

31:7 For in that day every man shall cast away his idols of silver,
and his idols of gold, which your own hands have made unto you for a
sin.

31:8 Then shall the Assyrian fall with the sword, not of a mighty man;
and the sword, not of a mean man, shall devour him: but he shall flee
from the sword, and his young men shall be discomfited.

31:9 And he shall pass over to his strong hold for fear, and his
princes shall be afraid of the ensign, saith the LORD, whose fire is
in Zion, and his furnace in Jerusalem.

32:1 Behold, a king shall reign in righteousness, and princes shall
rule in judgment.

32:2 And a man shall be as an hiding place from the wind, and a covert
from the tempest; as rivers of water in a dry place, as the shadow of
a great rock in a weary land.

32:3 And the eyes of them that see shall not be dim, and the ears of
them that hear shall hearken.

32:4 The heart also of the rash shall understand knowledge, and the
tongue of the stammerers shall be ready to speak plainly.

32:5 The vile person shall be no more called liberal, nor the churl
said to be bountiful.

32:6 For the vile person will speak villany, and his heart will work
iniquity, to practise hypocrisy, and to utter error against the LORD,
to make empty the soul of the hungry, and he will cause the drink of
the thirsty to fail.

32:7 The instruments also of the churl are evil: he deviseth wicked
devices to destroy the poor with lying words, even when the needy
speaketh right.

32:8 But the liberal deviseth liberal things; and by liberal things
shall he stand.

32:9 Rise up, ye women that are at ease; hear my voice, ye careless
daughters; give ear unto my speech.

32:10 Many days and years shall ye be troubled, ye careless women: for
the vintage shall fail, the gathering shall not come.

32:11 Tremble, ye women that are at ease; be troubled, ye careless
ones: strip you, and make you bare, and gird sackcloth upon your
loins.

32:12 They shall lament for the teats, for the pleasant fields, for
the fruitful vine.

32:13 Upon the land of my people shall come up thorns and briers; yea,
upon all the houses of joy in the joyous city: 32:14 Because the
palaces shall be forsaken; the multitude of the city shall be left;
the forts and towers shall be for dens for ever, a joy of wild asses,
a pasture of flocks; 32:15 Until the spirit be poured upon us from on
high, and the wilderness be a fruitful field, and the fruitful field
be counted for a forest.

32:16 Then judgment shall dwell in the wilderness, and righteousness
remain in the fruitful field.

32:17 And the work of righteousness shall be peace; and the effect of
righteousness quietness and assurance for ever.

32:18 And my people shall dwell in a peaceable habitation, and in sure
dwellings, and in quiet resting places; 32:19 When it shall hail,
coming down on the forest; and the city shall be low in a low place.

32:20 Blessed are ye that sow beside all waters, that send forth
thither the feet of the ox and the ass.

33:1 Woe to thee that spoilest, and thou wast not spoiled; and dealest
treacherously, and they dealt not treacherously with thee! when thou
shalt cease to spoil, thou shalt be spoiled; and when thou shalt make
an end to deal treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee.

33:2 O LORD, be gracious unto us; we have waited for thee: be thou
their arm every morning, our salvation also in the time of trouble.

33:3 At the noise of the tumult the people fled; at the lifting up of
thyself the nations were scattered.

33:4 And your spoil shall be gathered like the gathering of the
caterpiller: as the running to and fro of locusts shall he run upon
them.

33:5 The LORD is exalted; for he dwelleth on high: he hath filled Zion
with judgment and righteousness.

33:6 And wisdom and knowledge shall be the stability of thy times, and
strength of salvation: the fear of the LORD is his treasure.

33:7 Behold, their valiant ones shall cry without: the ambassadors of
peace shall weep bitterly.

33:8 The highways lie waste, the wayfaring man ceaseth: he hath broken
the covenant, he hath despised the cities, he regardeth no man.

33:9 The earth mourneth and languisheth: Lebanon is ashamed and hewn
down: Sharon is like a wilderness; and Bashan and Carmel shake off
their fruits.

33:10 Now will I rise, saith the LORD; now will I be exalted; now will
I lift up myself.

33:11 Ye shall conceive chaff, ye shall bring forth stubble: your
breath, as fire, shall devour you.

33:12 And the people shall be as the burnings of lime: as thorns cut
up shall they be burned in the fire.

33:13 Hear, ye that are far off, what I have done; and, ye that are
near, acknowledge my might.

33:14 The sinners in Zion are afraid; fearfulness hath surprised the
hypocrites. Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who
among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings?  33:15 He that walketh
righteously, and speaketh uprightly; he that despiseth the gain of
oppressions, that shaketh his hands from holding of bribes, that
stoppeth his ears from hearing of blood, and shutteth his eyes from
seeing evil; 33:16 He shall dwell on high: his place of defence shall
be the munitions of rocks: bread shall be given him; his waters shall
be sure.

33:17 Thine eyes shall see the king in his beauty: they shall behold
the land that is very far off.

33:18 Thine heart shall meditate terror. Where is the scribe? where is
the receiver? where is he that counted the towers?  33:19 Thou shalt
not see a fierce people, a people of a deeper speech than thou canst
perceive; of a stammering tongue, that thou canst not understand.

33:20 Look upon Zion, the city of our solemnities: thine eyes shall
see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a tabernacle that shall not be taken
down; not one of the stakes thereof shall ever be removed, neither
shall any of the cords thereof be broken.

33:21 But there the glorious LORD will be unto us a place of broad
rivers and streams; wherein shall go no galley with oars, neither
shall gallant ship pass thereby.

33:22 For the LORD is our judge, the LORD is our lawgiver, the LORD is
our king; he will save us.

33:23 Thy tacklings are loosed; they could not well strengthen their
mast, they could not spread the sail: then is the prey of a great
spoil divided; the lame take the prey.

33:24 And the inhabitant shall not say, I am sick: the people that
dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity.

34:1 Come near, ye nations, to hear; and hearken, ye people: let the
earth hear, and all that is therein; the world, and all things that
come forth of it.

34:2 For the indignation of the LORD is upon all nations, and his fury
upon all their armies: he hath utterly destroyed them, he hath
delivered them to the slaughter.

34:3 Their slain also shall be cast out, and their stink shall come up
out of their carcases, and the mountains shall be melted with their
blood.

34:4 And all the host of heaven shall be dissolved, and the heavens
shall be rolled together as a scroll: and all their host shall fall
down, as the leaf falleth off from the vine, and as a falling fig from
the fig tree.

34:5 For my sword shall be bathed in heaven: behold, it shall come
down upon Idumea, and upon the people of my curse, to judgment.

34:6 The sword of the LORD is filled with blood, it is made fat with
fatness, and with the blood of lambs and goats, with the fat of the
kidneys of rams: for the LORD hath a sacrifice in Bozrah, and a great
slaughter in the land of Idumea.

34:7 And the unicorns shall come down with them, and the bullocks with
the bulls; and their land shall be soaked with blood, and their dust
made fat with fatness.

34:8 For it is the day of the LORD's vengeance, and the year of
recompences for the controversy of Zion.

34:9 And the streams thereof shall be turned into pitch, and the dust
thereof into brimstone, and the land thereof shall become burning
pitch.

34:10 It shall not be quenched night nor day; the smoke thereof shall
go up for ever: from generation to generation it shall lie waste; none
shall pass through it for ever and ever.

34:11 But the cormorant and the bittern shall possess it; the owl also
and the raven shall dwell in it: and he shall stretch out upon it the
line of confusion, and the stones of emptiness.

34:12 They shall call the nobles thereof to the kingdom, but none
shall be there, and all her princes shall be nothing.

34:13 And thorns shall come up in her palaces, nettles and brambles in
the fortresses thereof: and it shall be an habitation of dragons, and
a court for owls.

34:14 The wild beasts of the desert shall also meet with the wild
beasts of the island, and the satyr shall cry to his fellow; the
screech owl also shall rest there, and find for herself a place of
rest.

34:15 There shall the great owl make her nest, and lay, and hatch, and
gather under her shadow: there shall the vultures also be gathered,
every one with her mate.

34:16 Seek ye out of the book of the LORD, and read: no one of these
shall fail, none shall want her mate: for my mouth it hath commanded,
and his spirit it hath gathered them.

34:17 And he hath cast the lot for them, and his hand hath divided it
unto them by line: they shall possess it for ever, from generation to
generation shall they dwell therein.

35:1 The wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad for them; and
the desert shall rejoice, and blossom as the rose.

35:2 It shall blossom abundantly, and rejoice even with joy and
singing: the glory of Lebanon shall be given unto it, the excellency
of Carmel and Sharon, they shall see the glory of the LORD, and the
excellency of our God.

35:3 Strengthen ye the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees.

35:4 Say to them that are of a fearful heart, Be strong, fear not:
behold, your God will come with vengeance, even God with a recompence;
he will come and save you.

35:5 Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the
deaf shall be unstopped.

35:6 Then shall the lame man leap as an hart, and the tongue of the
dumb sing: for in the wilderness shall waters break out, and streams
in the desert.

35:7 And the parched ground shall become a pool, and the thirsty land
springs of water: in the habitation of dragons, where each lay, shall
be grass with reeds and rushes.

35:8 And an highway shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called
The way of holiness; the unclean shall not pass over it; but it shall
be for those: the wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err therein.

35:9 No lion shall be there, nor any ravenous beast shall go up
thereon, it shall not be found there; but the redeemed shall walk
there: 35:10 And the ransomed of the LORD shall return, and come to
Zion with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads: they shall
obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away.

36:1 Now it came to pass in the fourteenth year of king Hezekiah, that
Sennacherib king of Assyria came up against all the defenced cities of
Judah, and took them.

36:2 And the king of Assyria sent Rabshakeh from Lachish to Jerusalem
unto king Hezekiah with a great army. And he stood by the conduit of
the upper pool in the highway of the fuller's field.

36:3 Then came forth unto him Eliakim, Hilkiah's son, which was over
the house, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah, Asaph's son, the recorder.

36:4 And Rabshakeh said unto them, Say ye now to Hezekiah, Thus saith
the great king, the king of Assyria, What confidence is this wherein
thou trustest?  36:5 I say, sayest thou, (but they are but vain words)
I have counsel and strength for war: now on whom dost thou trust, that
thou rebellest against me?  36:6 Lo, thou trustest in the staff of
this broken reed, on Egypt; whereon if a man lean, it will go into his
hand, and pierce it: so is Pharaoh king of Egypt to all that trust in
him.

36:7 But if thou say to me, We trust in the LORD our God: is it not
he, whose high places and whose altars Hezekiah hath taken away, and
said to Judah and to Jerusalem, Ye shall worship before this altar?
36:8 Now therefore give pledges, I pray thee, to my master the king of
Assyria, and I will give thee two thousand horses, if thou be able on
thy part to set riders upon them.

36:9 How then wilt thou turn away the face of one captain of the least
of my master's servants, and put thy trust on Egypt for chariots and
for horsemen?  36:10 And am I now come up without the LORD against
this land to destroy it? the LORD said unto me, Go up against this
land, and destroy it.

36:11 Then said Eliakim and Shebna and Joah unto Rabshakeh, Speak, I
pray thee, unto thy servants in the Syrian language; for we understand
it: and speak not to us in the Jews' language, in the ears of the
people that are on the wall.

36:12 But Rabshakeh said, Hath my master sent me to thy master and to
thee to speak these words? hath he not sent me to the men that sit
upon the wall, that they may eat their own dung, and drink their own
piss with you?  36:13 Then Rabshakeh stood, and cried with a loud
voice in the Jews' language, and said, Hear ye the words of the great
king, the king of Assyria.

36:14 Thus saith the king, Let not Hezekiah deceive you: for he shall
not be able to deliver you.

36:15 Neither let Hezekiah make you trust in the LORD, saying, The
LORD will surely deliver us: this city shall not be delivered into the
hand of the king of Assyria.

36:16 Hearken not to Hezekiah: for thus saith the king of Assyria,
Make an agreement with me by a present, and come out to me: and eat ye
every one of his vine, and every one of his fig tree, and drink ye
every one the waters of his own cistern; 36:17 Until I come and take
you away to a land like your own land, a land of corn and wine, a land
of bread and vineyards.

36:18 Beware lest Hezekiah persuade you, saying, the LORD will deliver
us.

Hath any of the gods of the nations delivered his land out of the hand
of the king of Assyria?  36:19 Where are the gods of Hamath and
Arphad? where are the gods of Sepharvaim? and have they delivered
Samaria out of my hand?  36:20 Who are they among all the gods of
these lands, that have delivered their land out of my hand, that the
LORD should deliver Jerusalem out of my hand?  36:21 But they held
their peace, and answered him not a word: for the king's commandment
was, saying, Answer him not.

36:22 Then came Eliakim, the son of Hilkiah, that was over the
household, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah, the son of Asaph, the
recorder, to Hezekiah with their clothes rent, and told him the words
of Rabshakeh.

37:1 And it came to pass, when king Hezekiah heard it, that he rent
his clothes, and covered himself with sackcloth, and went into the
house of the LORD.

37:2 And he sent Eliakim, who was over the household, and Shebna the
scribe, and the elders of the priests covered with sackcloth, unto
Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz.

37:3 And they said unto him, Thus saith Hezekiah, This day is a day of
trouble, and of rebuke, and of blasphemy: for the children are come to
the birth, and there is not strength to bring forth.

37:4 It may be the LORD thy God will hear the words of Rabshakeh, whom
the king of Assyria his master hath sent to reproach the living God,
and will reprove the words which the LORD thy God hath heard:
wherefore lift up thy prayer for the remnant that is left.

37:5 So the servants of king Hezekiah came to Isaiah.

37:6 And Isaiah said unto them, Thus shall ye say unto your master,
Thus saith the LORD, Be not afraid of the words that thou hast heard,
wherewith the servants of the king of Assyria have blasphemed me.

37:7 Behold, I will send a blast upon him, and he shall hear a rumour,
and return to his own land; and I will cause him to fall by the sword
in his own land.

37:8 So Rabshakeh returned, and found the king of Assyria warring
against Libnah: for he had heard that he was departed from Lachish.

37:9 And he heard say concerning Tirhakah king of Ethiopia, He is come
forth to make war with thee. And when he heard it, he sent messengers
to Hezekiah, saying, 37:10 Thus shall ye speak to Hezekiah king of
Judah, saying, Let not thy God, in whom thou trustest, deceive thee,
saying, Jerusalem shall not be given into the hand of the king of
Assyria.

37:11 Behold, thou hast heard what the kings of Assyria have done to
all lands by destroying them utterly; and shalt thou be delivered?
37:12 Have the gods of the nations delivered them which my fathers
have destroyed, as Gozan, and Haran, and Rezeph, and the children of
Eden which were in Telassar?  37:13 Where is the king of Hamath, and
the king of Arphad, and the king of the city of Sepharvaim, Hena, and
Ivah?  37:14 And Hezekiah received the letter from the hand of the
messengers, and read it: and Hezekiah went up unto the house of the
LORD, and spread it before the LORD.

37:15 And Hezekiah prayed unto the LORD, saying, 37:16 O LORD of
hosts, God of Israel, that dwellest between the cherubims, thou art
the God, even thou alone, of all the kingdoms of the earth: thou hast
made heaven and earth.

37:17 Incline thine ear, O LORD, and hear; open thine eyes, O LORD,
and see: and hear all the words of Sennacherib, which hath sent to
reproach the living God.

37:18 Of a truth, LORD, the kings of Assyria have laid waste all the
nations, and their countries, 37:19 And have cast their gods into the
fire: for they were no gods, but the work of men's hands, wood and
stone: therefore they have destroyed them.

37:20 Now therefore, O LORD our God, save us from his hand, that all
the kingdoms of the earth may know that thou art the LORD, even thou
only.

37:21 Then Isaiah the son of Amoz sent unto Hezekiah, saying, Thus
saith the LORD God of Israel, Whereas thou hast prayed to me against
Sennacherib king of Assyria: 37:22 This is the word which the LORD
hath spoken concerning him; The virgin, the daughter of Zion, hath
despised thee, and laughed thee to scorn; the daughter of Jerusalem
hath shaken her head at thee.

37:23 Whom hast thou reproached and blasphemed? and against whom hast
thou exalted thy voice, and lifted up thine eyes on high? even against
the Holy One of Israel.

37:24 By thy servants hast thou reproached the Lord, and hast said, By
the multitude of my chariots am I come up to the height of the
mountains, to the sides of Lebanon; and I will cut down the tall
cedars thereof, and the choice fir trees thereof: and I will enter
into the height of his border, and the forest of his Carmel.

37:25 I have digged, and drunk water; and with the sole of my feet
have I dried up all the rivers of the besieged places.

37:26 Hast thou not heard long ago, how I have done it; and of ancient
times, that I have formed it? now have I brought it to pass, that thou
shouldest be to lay waste defenced cities into ruinous heaps.

37:27 Therefore their inhabitants were of small power, they were
dismayed and confounded: they were as the grass of the field, and as
the green herb, as the grass on the housetops, and as corn blasted
before it be grown up.

37:28 But I know thy abode, and thy going out, and thy coming in, and
thy rage against me.

37:29 Because thy rage against me, and thy tumult, is come up into
mine ears, therefore will I put my hook in thy nose, and my bridle in
thy lips, and I will turn thee back by the way by which thou camest.

37:30 And this shall be a sign unto thee, Ye shall eat this year such
as groweth of itself; and the second year that which springeth of the
same: and in the third year sow ye, and reap, and plant vineyards, and
eat the fruit thereof.

37:31 And the remnant that is escaped of the house of Judah shall
again take root downward, and bear fruit upward: 37:32 For out of
Jerusalem shall go forth a remnant, and they that escape out of mount
Zion: the zeal of the LORD of hosts shall do this.

37:33 Therefore thus saith the LORD concerning the king of Assyria, He
shall not come into this city, nor shoot an arrow there, nor come
before it with shields, nor cast a bank against it.

37:34 By the way that he came, by the same shall he return, and shall
not come into this city, saith the LORD.

37:35 For I will defend this city to save it for mine own sake, and
for my servant David's sake.

37:36 Then the angel of the LORD went forth, and smote in the camp of
the Assyrians a hundred and fourscore and five thousand: and when they
arose early in the morning, behold, they were all dead corpses.

37:37 So Sennacherib king of Assyria departed, and went and returned,
and dwelt at Nineveh.

37:38 And it came to pass, as he was worshipping in the house of
Nisroch his god, that Adrammelech and Sharezer his sons smote him with
the sword; and they escaped into the land of Armenia: and Esarhaddon
his son reigned in his stead.

38:1 In those days was Hezekiah sick unto death. And Isaiah the
prophet the son of Amoz came unto him, and said unto him, Thus saith
the LORD, Set thine house in order: for thou shalt die, and not live.

38:2 Then Hezekiah turned his face toward the wall, and prayed unto
the LORD, 38:3 And said, Remember now, O LORD, I beseech thee, how I
have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and have
done that which is good in thy sight. And Hezekiah wept sore.

38:4 Then came the word of the LORD to Isaiah, saying, 38:5 Go, and
say to Hezekiah, Thus saith the LORD, the God of David thy father, I
have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy tears: behold, I will add unto
thy days fifteen years.

38:6 And I will deliver thee and this city out of the hand of the king
of Assyria: and I will defend this city.

38:7 And this shall be a sign unto thee from the LORD, that the LORD
will do this thing that he hath spoken; 38:8 Behold, I will bring
again the shadow of the degrees, which is gone down in the sun dial of
Ahaz, ten degrees backward. So the sun returned ten degrees, by which
degrees it was gone down.

38:9 The writing of Hezekiah king of Judah, when he had been sick, and
was recovered of his sickness: 38:10 I said in the cutting off of my
days, I shall go to the gates of the grave: I am deprived of the
residue of my years.

38:11 I said, I shall not see the LORD, even the LORD, in the land of
the living: I shall behold man no more with the inhabitants of the
world.

38:12 Mine age is departed, and is removed from me as a shepherd's
tent: I have cut off like a weaver my life: he will cut me off with
pining sickness: from day even to night wilt thou make an end of me.

38:13 I reckoned till morning, that, as a lion, so will he break all
my bones: from day even to night wilt thou make an end of me.

38:14 Like a crane or a swallow, so did I chatter: I did mourn as a
dove: mine eyes fail with looking upward: O LORD, I am oppressed;
undertake for me.

38:15 What shall I say? he hath both spoken unto me, and himself hath
done it: I shall go softly all my years in the bitterness of my soul.

38:16 O LORD, by these things men live, and in all these things is the
life of my spirit: so wilt thou recover me, and make me to live.

38:17 Behold, for peace I had great bitterness: but thou hast in love
to my soul delivered it from the pit of corruption: for thou hast cast
all my sins behind thy back.

38:18 For the grave cannot praise thee, death can not celebrate thee:
they that go down into the pit cannot hope for thy truth.

38:19 The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I do this day:
the father to the children shall make known thy truth.

38:20 The LORD was ready to save me: therefore we will sing my songs
to the stringed instruments all the days of our life in the house of
the LORD.

38:21 For Isaiah had said, Let them take a lump of figs, and lay it
for a plaister upon the boil, and he shall recover.

38:22 Hezekiah also had said, What is the sign that I shall go up to
the house of the LORD?  39:1 At that time Merodachbaladan, the son of
Baladan, king of Babylon, sent letters and a present to Hezekiah: for
he had heard that he had been sick, and was recovered.

39:2 And Hezekiah was glad of them, and shewed them the house of his
precious things, the silver, and the gold, and the spices, and the
precious ointment, and all the house of his armour, and all that was
found in his treasures: there was nothing in his house, nor in all his
dominion, that Hezekiah shewed them not.

39:3 Then came Isaiah the prophet unto king Hezekiah, and said unto
him, What said these men? and from whence came they unto thee? And
Hezekiah said, They are come from a far country unto me, even from
Babylon.

39:4 Then said he, What have they seen in thine house? And Hezekiah
answered, All that is in mine house have they seen: there is nothing
among my treasures that I have not shewed them.

39:5 Then said Isaiah to Hezekiah, Hear the word of the LORD of hosts:
39:6 Behold, the days come, that all that is in thine house, and that
which thy fathers have laid up in store until this day, shall be
carried to Babylon: nothing shall be left, saith the LORD.

39:7 And of thy sons that shall issue from thee, which thou shalt
beget, shall they take away; and they shall be eunuchs in the palace
of the king of Babylon.

39:8 Then said Hezekiah to Isaiah, Good is the word of the LORD which
thou hast spoken. He said moreover, For there shall be peace and truth
in my days.

40:1 Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, saith your God.

40:2 Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her
warfare is accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned: for she hath
received of the LORD's hand double for all her sins.

40:3 The voice of him that crieth in the wilderness, Prepare ye the
way of the LORD, make straight in the desert a highway for our God.

40:4 Every valley shall be exalted, and every mountain and hill shall
be made low: and the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough
places plain: 40:5 And the glory of the LORD shall be revealed, and
all flesh shall see it together: for the mouth of the LORD hath spoken
it.

40:6 The voice said, Cry. And he said, What shall I cry? All flesh is
grass, and all the goodliness thereof is as the flower of the field:
40:7 The grass withereth, the flower fadeth: because the spirit of the
LORD bloweth upon it: surely the people is grass.

40:8 The grass withereth, the flower fadeth: but the word of our God
shall stand for ever.

40:9 O Zion, that bringest good tidings, get thee up into the high
mountain; O Jerusalem, that bringest good tidings, lift up thy voice
with strength; lift it up, be not afraid; say unto the cities of
Judah, Behold your God!  40:10 Behold, the Lord GOD will come with
strong hand, and his arm shall rule for him: behold, his reward is
with him, and his work before him.

40:11 He shall feed his flock like a shepherd: he shall gather the
lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead
those that are with young.

40:12 Who hath measured the waters in the hollow of his hand, and
meted out heaven with the span, and comprehended the dust of the earth
in a measure, and weighed the mountains in scales, and the hills in a
balance?  40:13 Who hath directed the Spirit of the LORD, or being his
counsellor hath taught him?  40:14 With whom took he counsel, and who
instructed him, and taught him in the path of judgment, and taught him
knowledge, and shewed to him the way of understanding?  40:15 Behold,
the nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as the small
dust of the balance: behold, he taketh up the isles as a very little
thing.

40:16 And Lebanon is not sufficient to burn, nor the beasts thereof
sufficient for a burnt offering.

40:17 All nations before him are as nothing; and they are counted to
him less than nothing, and vanity.

40:18 To whom then will ye liken God? or what likeness will ye compare
unto him?  40:19 The workman melteth a graven image, and the goldsmith
spreadeth it over with gold, and casteth silver chains.

40:20 He that is so impoverished that he hath no oblation chooseth a
tree that will not rot; he seeketh unto him a cunning workman to
prepare a graven image, that shall not be moved.

40:21 Have ye not known? have ye not heard? hath it not been told you
from the beginning? have ye not understood from the foundations of the
earth?  40:22 It is he that sitteth upon the circle of the earth, and
the inhabitants thereof are as grasshoppers; that stretcheth out the
heavens as a curtain, and spreadeth them out as a tent to dwell in:
40:23 That bringeth the princes to nothing; he maketh the judges of
the earth as vanity.

40:24 Yea, they shall not be planted; yea, they shall not be sown:
yea, their stock shall not take root in the earth: and he shall also
blow upon them, and they shall wither, and the whirlwind shall take
them away as stubble.

40:25 To whom then will ye liken me, or shall I be equal? saith the
Holy One.

40:26 Lift up your eyes on high, and behold who hath created these
things, that bringeth out their host by number: he calleth them all by
names by the greatness of his might, for that he is strong in power;
not one faileth.

40:27 Why sayest thou, O Jacob, and speakest, O Israel, My way is hid
from the LORD, and my judgment is passed over from my God?  40:28 Hast
thou not known? hast thou not heard, that the everlasting God, the
LORD, the Creator of the ends of the earth, fainteth not, neither is
weary? there is no searching of his understanding.

40:29 He giveth power to the faint; and to them that have no might he
increaseth strength.

40:30 Even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the young men
shall utterly fall: 40:31 But they that wait upon the LORD shall renew
their strength; they shall mount up with wings as eagles; they shall
run, and not be weary; and they shall walk, and not faint.

41:1 Keep silence before me, O islands; and let the people renew their
strength: let them come near; then let them speak: let us come near
together to judgment.

41:2 Who raised up the righteous man from the east, called him to his
foot, gave the nations before him, and made him rule over kings? he
gave them as the dust to his sword, and as driven stubble to his bow.

41:3 He pursued them, and passed safely; even by the way that he had
not gone with his feet.

41:4 Who hath wrought and done it, calling the generations from the
beginning? I the LORD, the first, and with the last; I am he.

41:5 The isles saw it, and feared; the ends of the earth were afraid,
drew near, and came.

41:6 They helped every one his neighbour; and every one said to his
brother, Be of good courage.

41:7 So the carpenter encouraged the goldsmith, and he that smootheth
with the hammer him that smote the anvil, saying, It is ready for the
sodering: and he fastened it with nails, that it should not be moved.

41:8 But thou, Israel, art my servant, Jacob whom I have chosen, the
seed of Abraham my friend.

41:9 Thou whom I have taken from the ends of the earth, and called
thee from the chief men thereof, and said unto thee, Thou art my
servant; I have chosen thee, and not cast thee away.

41:10 Fear thou not; for I am with thee: be not dismayed; for I am thy
God: I will strengthen thee; yea, I will help thee; yea, I will uphold
thee with the right hand of my righteousness.

41:11 Behold, all they that were incensed against thee shall be
ashamed and confounded: they shall be as nothing; and they that strive
with thee shall perish.

41:12 Thou shalt seek them, and shalt not find them, even them that
contended with thee: they that war against thee shall be as nothing,
and as a thing of nought.

41:13 For I the LORD thy God will hold thy right hand, saying unto
thee, Fear not; I will help thee.

41:14 Fear not, thou worm Jacob, and ye men of Israel; I will help
thee, saith the LORD, and thy redeemer, the Holy One of Israel.

41:15 Behold, I will make thee a new sharp threshing instrument having
teeth: thou shalt thresh the mountains, and beat them small, and shalt
make the hills as chaff.

41:16 Thou shalt fan them, and the wind shall carry them away, and the
whirlwind shall scatter them: and thou shalt rejoice in the LORD, and
shalt glory in the Holy One of Israel.

41:17 When the poor and needy seek water, and there is none, and their
tongue faileth for thirst, I the LORD will hear them, I the God of
Israel will not forsake them.

41:18 I will open rivers in high places, and fountains in the midst of
the valleys: I will make the wilderness a pool of water, and the dry
land springs of water.

41:19 I will plant in the wilderness the cedar, the shittah tree, and
the myrtle, and the oil tree; I will set in the desert the fir tree,
and the pine, and the box tree together: 41:20 That they may see, and
know, and consider, and understand together, that the hand of the LORD
hath done this, and the Holy One of Israel hath created it.

41:21 Produce your cause, saith the LORD; bring forth your strong
reasons, saith the King of Jacob.

41:22 Let them bring them forth, and shew us what shall happen: let
them shew the former things, what they be, that we may consider them,
and know the latter end of them; or declare us things for to come.

41:23 Shew the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know
that ye are gods: yea, do good, or do evil, that we may be dismayed,
and behold it together.

41:24 Behold, ye are of nothing, and your work of nought: an
abomination is he that chooseth you.

41:25 I have raised up one from the north, and he shall come: from the
rising of the sun shall he call upon my name: and he shall come upon
princes as upon morter, and as the potter treadeth clay.

41:26 Who hath declared from the beginning, that we may know? and
beforetime, that we may say, He is righteous? yea, there is none that
sheweth, yea, there is none that declareth, yea, there is none that
heareth your words.

41:27 The first shall say to Zion, Behold, behold them: and I will
give to Jerusalem one that bringeth good tidings.

41:28 For I beheld, and there was no man; even among them, and there
was no counsellor, that, when I asked of them, could answer a word.

41:29 Behold, they are all vanity; their works are nothing: their
molten images are wind and confusion.

42:1 Behold my servant, whom I uphold; mine elect, in whom my soul
delighteth; I have put my spirit upon him: he shall bring forth
judgment to the Gentiles.

42:2 He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in
the street.

42:3 A bruised reed shall he not break, and the smoking flax shall he
not quench: he shall bring forth judgment unto truth.

42:4 He shall not fail nor be discouraged, till he have set judgment
in the earth: and the isles shall wait for his law.

42:5 Thus saith God the LORD, he that created the heavens, and
stretched them out; he that spread forth the earth, and that which
cometh out of it; he that giveth breath unto the people upon it, and
spirit to them that walk therein: 42:6 I the LORD have called thee in
righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and give
thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles; 42:7
To open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the prison,
and them that sit in darkness out of the prison house.

42:8 I am the LORD: that is my name: and my glory will I not give to
another, neither my praise to graven images.

42:9 Behold, the former things are come to pass, and new things do I
declare: before they spring forth I tell you of them.

42:10 Sing unto the LORD a new song, and his praise from the end of
the earth, ye that go down to the sea, and all that is therein; the
isles, and the inhabitants thereof.

42:11 Let the wilderness and the cities thereof lift up their voice,
the villages that Kedar doth inhabit: let the inhabitants of the rock
sing, let them shout from the top of the mountains.

42:12 Let them give glory unto the LORD, and declare his praise in the
islands.

42:13 The LORD shall go forth as a mighty man, he shall stir up
jealousy like a man of war: he shall cry, yea, roar; he shall prevail
against his enemies.

42:14 I have long time holden my peace; I have been still, and
refrained myself: now will I cry like a travailing woman; I will
destroy and devour at once.

42:15 I will make waste mountains and hills, and dry up all their
herbs; and I will make the rivers islands, and I will dry up the
pools.

42:16 And I will bring the blind by a way that they knew not; I will
lead them in paths that they have not known: I will make darkness
light before them, and crooked things straight. These things will I do
unto them, and not forsake them.

42:17 They shall be turned back, they shall be greatly ashamed, that
trust in graven images, that say to the molten images, Ye are our
gods.

42:18 Hear, ye deaf; and look, ye blind, that ye may see.

42:19 Who is blind, but my servant? or deaf, as my messenger that I
sent?  who is blind as he that is perfect, and blind as the LORD's
servant?  42:20 Seeing many things, but thou observest not; opening
the ears, but he heareth not.

42:21 The LORD is well pleased for his righteousness' sake; he will
magnify the law, and make it honourable.

42:22 But this is a people robbed and spoiled; they are all of them
snared in holes, and they are hid in prison houses: they are for a
prey, and none delivereth; for a spoil, and none saith, Restore.

42:23 Who among you will give ear to this? who will hearken and hear
for the time to come?  42:24 Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to
the robbers? did not the LORD, he against whom we have sinned? for
they would not walk in his ways, neither were they obedient unto his
law.

42:25 Therefore he hath poured upon him the fury of his anger, and the
strength of battle: and it hath set him on fire round about, yet he
knew not; and it burned him, yet he laid it not to heart.

43:1 But now thus saith the LORD that created thee, O Jacob, and he
that formed thee, O Israel, Fear not: for I have redeemed thee, I have
called thee by thy name; thou art mine.

43:2 When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee; and
through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee: when thou walkest
through the fire, thou shalt not be burned; neither shall the flame
kindle upon thee.

43:3 For I am the LORD thy God, the Holy One of Israel, thy Saviour: I
gave Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba for thee.

43:4 Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou hast been honourable,
and I have loved thee: therefore will I give men for thee, and people
for thy life.

43:5 Fear not: for I am with thee: I will bring thy seed from the
east, and gather thee from the west; 43:6 I will say to the north,
Give up; and to the south, Keep not back: bring my sons from far, and
my daughters from the ends of the earth; 43:7 Even every one that is
called by my name: for I have created him for my glory, I have formed
him; yea, I have made him.

43:8 Bring forth the blind people that have eyes, and the deaf that
have ears.

43:9 Let all the nations be gathered together, and let the people be
assembled: who among them can declare this, and shew us former things?
let them bring forth their witnesses, that they may be justified: or
let them hear, and say, It is truth.

43:10 Ye are my witnesses, saith the LORD, and my servant whom I have
chosen: that ye may know and believe me, and understand that I am he:
before me there was no God formed, neither shall there be after me.

43:11 I, even I, am the LORD; and beside me there is no saviour.

43:12 I have declared, and have saved, and I have shewed, when there
was no strange god among you: therefore ye are my witnesses, saith the
LORD, that I am God.

43:13 Yea, before the day was I am he; and there is none that can
deliver out of my hand: I will work, and who shall let it?  43:14 Thus
saith the LORD, your redeemer, the Holy One of Israel; For your sake I
have sent to Babylon, and have brought down all their nobles, and the
Chaldeans, whose cry is in the ships.

43:15 I am the LORD, your Holy One, the creator of Israel, your King.

43:16 Thus saith the LORD, which maketh a way in the sea, and a path
in the mighty waters; 43:17 Which bringeth forth the chariot and
horse, the army and the power; they shall lie down together, they
shall not rise: they are extinct, they are quenched as tow.

43:18 Remember ye not the former things, neither consider the things
of old.

43:19 Behold, I will do a new thing; now it shall spring forth; shall
ye not know it? I will even make a way in the wilderness, and rivers
in the desert.

43:20 The beast of the field shall honour me, the dragons and the
owls: because I give waters in the wilderness, and rivers in the
desert, to give drink to my people, my chosen.

43:21 This people have I formed for myself; they shall shew forth my
praise.

43:22 But thou hast not called upon me, O Jacob; but thou hast been
weary of me, O Israel.

43:23 Thou hast not brought me the small cattle of thy burnt
offerings; neither hast thou honoured me with thy sacrifices. I have
not caused thee to serve with an offering, nor wearied thee with
incense.

43:24 Thou hast bought me no sweet cane with money, neither hast thou
filled me with the fat of thy sacrifices: but thou hast made me to
serve with thy sins, thou hast wearied me with thine iniquities.

43:25 I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine
own sake, and will not remember thy sins.

43:26 Put me in remembrance: let us plead together: declare thou, that
thou mayest be justified.

43:27 Thy first father hath sinned, and thy teachers have transgressed
against me.

43:28 Therefore I have profaned the princes of the sanctuary, and have
given Jacob to the curse, and Israel to reproaches.

44:1 Yet now hear, O Jacob my servant; and Israel, whom I have chosen:
44:2 Thus saith the LORD that made thee, and formed thee from the
womb, which will help thee; Fear not, O Jacob, my servant; and thou,
Jesurun, whom I have chosen.

44:3 For I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon
the dry ground: I will pour my spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing
upon thine offspring: 44:4 And they shall spring up as among the
grass, as willows by the water courses.

44:5 One shall say, I am the LORD's; and another shall call himself by
the name of Jacob; and another shall subscribe with his hand unto the
LORD, and surname himself by the name of Israel.

44:6 Thus saith the LORD the King of Israel, and his redeemer the LORD
of hosts; I am the first, and I am the last; and beside me there is no
God.

44:7 And who, as I, shall call, and shall declare it, and set it in
order for me, since I appointed the ancient people? and the things
that are coming, and shall come, let them shew unto them.

44:8 Fear ye not, neither be afraid: have not I told thee from that
time, and have declared it? ye are even my witnesses. Is there a God
beside me? yea, there is no God; I know not any.

44:9 They that make a graven image are all of them vanity; and their
delectable things shall not profit; and they are their own witnesses;
they see not, nor know; that they may be ashamed.

44:10 Who hath formed a god, or molten a graven image that is
profitable for nothing?  44:11 Behold, all his fellows shall be
ashamed: and the workmen, they are of men: let them all be gathered
together, let them stand up; yet they shall fear, and they shall be
ashamed together.

44:12 The smith with the tongs both worketh in the coals, and
fashioneth it with hammers, and worketh it with the strength of his
arms: yea, he is hungry, and his strength faileth: he drinketh no
water, and is faint.

44:13 The carpenter stretcheth out his rule; he marketh it out with a
line; he fitteth it with planes, and he marketh it out with the
compass, and maketh it after the figure of a man, according to the
beauty of a man; that it may remain in the house.

44:14 He heweth him down cedars, and taketh the cypress and the oak,
which he strengtheneth for himself among the trees of the forest: he
planteth an ash, and the rain doth nourish it.

44:15 Then shall it be for a man to burn: for he will take thereof,
and warm himself; yea, he kindleth it, and baketh bread; yea, he
maketh a god, and worshippeth it; he maketh it a graven image, and
falleth down thereto.

44:16 He burneth part thereof in the fire; with part thereof he eateth
flesh; he roasteth roast, and is satisfied: yea, he warmeth himself,
and saith, Aha, I am warm, I have seen the fire: 44:17 And the residue
thereof he maketh a god, even his graven image: he falleth down unto
it, and worshippeth it, and prayeth unto it, and saith, Deliver me;
for thou art my god.

44:18 They have not known nor understood: for he hath shut their eyes,
that they cannot see; and their hearts, that they cannot understand.

44:19 And none considereth in his heart, neither is there knowledge
nor understanding to say, I have burned part of it in the fire; yea,
also I have baked bread upon the coals thereof; I have roasted flesh,
and eaten it: and shall I make the residue thereof an abomination?
shall I fall down to the stock of a tree?  44:20 He feedeth on ashes:
a deceived heart hath turned him aside, that he cannot deliver his
soul, nor say, Is there not a lie in my right hand?  44:21 Remember
these, O Jacob and Israel; for thou art my servant: I have formed
thee; thou art my servant: O Israel, thou shalt not be forgotten of
me.

44:22 I have blotted out, as a thick cloud, thy transgressions, and,
as a cloud, thy sins: return unto me; for I have redeemed thee.

44:23 Sing, O ye heavens; for the LORD hath done it: shout, ye lower
parts of the earth: break forth into singing, ye mountains, O forest,
and every tree therein: for the LORD hath redeemed Jacob, and
glorified himself in Israel.

44:24 Thus saith the LORD, thy redeemer, and he that formed thee from
the womb, I am the LORD that maketh all things; that stretcheth forth
the heavens alone; that spreadeth abroad the earth by myself; 44:25
That frustrateth the tokens of the liars, and maketh diviners mad;
that turneth wise men backward, and maketh their knowledge foolish;
44:26 That confirmeth the word of his servant, and performeth the
counsel of his messengers; that saith to Jerusalem, Thou shalt be
inhabited; and to the cities of Judah, Ye shall be built, and I will
raise up the decayed places thereof: 44:27 That saith to the deep, Be
dry, and I will dry up thy rivers: 44:28 That saith of Cyrus, He is my
shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure: even saying to Jerusalem,
Thou shalt be built; and to the temple, Thy foundation shall be laid.

45:1 Thus saith the LORD to his anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand I
have holden, to subdue nations before him; and I will loose the loins
of kings, to open before him the two leaved gates; and the gates shall
not be shut; 45:2 I will go before thee, and make the crooked places
straight: I will break in pieces the gates of brass, and cut in sunder
the bars of iron: 45:3 And I will give thee the treasures of darkness,
and hidden riches of secret places, that thou mayest know that I, the
LORD, which call thee by thy name, am the God of Israel.

45:4 For Jacob my servant's sake, and Israel mine elect, I have even
called thee by thy name: I have surnamed thee, though thou hast not
known me.

45:5 I am the LORD, and there is none else, there is no God beside me:
I girded thee, though thou hast not known me: 45:6 That they may know
from the rising of the sun, and from the west, that there is none
beside me. I am the LORD, and there is none else.

45:7 I form the light, and create darkness: I make peace, and create
evil: I the LORD do all these things.

45:8 Drop down, ye heavens, from above, and let the skies pour down
righteousness: let the earth open, and let them bring forth salvation,
and let righteousness spring up together; I the LORD have created it.

45:9 Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker! Let the potsherd
strive with the potsherds of the earth. Shall the clay say to him that
fashioneth it, What makest thou? or thy work, He hath no hands?  45:10
Woe unto him that saith unto his father, What begettest thou? or to
the woman, What hast thou brought forth?  45:11 Thus saith the LORD,
the Holy One of Israel, and his Maker, Ask me of things to come
concerning my sons, and concerning the work of my hands command ye me.

45:12 I have made the earth, and created man upon it: I, even my
hands, have stretched out the heavens, and all their host have I
commanded.

45:13 I have raised him up in righteousness, and I will direct all his
ways: he shall build my city, and he shall let go my captives, not for
price nor reward, saith the LORD of hosts.

45:14 Thus saith the LORD, The labour of Egypt, and merchandise of
Ethiopia and of the Sabeans, men of stature, shall come over unto
thee, and they shall be thine: they shall come after thee; in chains
they shall come over, and they shall fall down unto thee, they shall
make supplication unto thee, saying, Surely God is in thee; and there
is none else, there is no God.

45:15 Verily thou art a God that hidest thyself, O God of Israel, the
Saviour.

45:16 They shall be ashamed, and also confounded, all of them: they
shall go to confusion together that are makers of idols.

45:17 But Israel shall be saved in the LORD with an everlasting
salvation: ye shall not be ashamed nor confounded world without end.

45:18 For thus saith the LORD that created the heavens; God himself
that formed the earth and made it; he hath established it, he created
it not in vain, he formed it to be inhabited: I am the LORD; and there
is none else.

45:19 I have not spoken in secret, in a dark place of the earth: I
said not unto the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain: I the LORD speak
righteousness, I declare things that are right.

45:20 Assemble yourselves and come; draw near together, ye that are
escaped of the nations: they have no knowledge that set up the wood of
their graven image, and pray unto a god that cannot save.

45:21 Tell ye, and bring them near; yea, let them take counsel
together: who hath declared this from ancient time? who hath told it
from that time?  have not I the LORD? and there is no God else beside
me; a just God and a Saviour; there is none beside me.

45:22 Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth: for I
am God, and there is none else.

45:23 I have sworn by myself, the word is gone out of my mouth in
righteousness, and shall not return, That unto me every knee shall
bow, every tongue shall swear.

45:24 Surely, shall one say, in the LORD have I righteousness and
strength: even to him shall men come; and all that are incensed
against him shall be ashamed.

45:25 In the LORD shall all the seed of Israel be justified, and shall
glory.

46:1 Bel boweth down, Nebo stoopeth, their idols were upon the beasts,
and upon the cattle: your carriages were heavy loaden; they are a
burden to the weary beast.

46:2 They stoop, they bow down together; they could not deliver the
burden, but themselves are gone into captivity.

46:3 Hearken unto me, O house of Jacob, and all the remnant of the
house of Israel, which are borne by me from the belly, which are
carried from the womb: 46:4 And even to your old age I am he; and even
to hoar hairs will I carry you: I have made, and I will bear; even I
will carry, and will deliver you.

46:5 To whom will ye liken me, and make me equal, and compare me, that
we may be like?  46:6 They lavish gold out of the bag, and weigh
silver in the balance, and hire a goldsmith; and he maketh it a god:
they fall down, yea, they worship.

46:7 They bear him upon the shoulder, they carry him, and set him in
his place, and he standeth; from his place shall he not remove: yea,
one shall cry unto him, yet can he not answer, nor save him out of his
trouble.

46:8 Remember this, and shew yourselves men: bring it again to mind, O
ye transgressors.

46:9 Remember the former things of old: for I am God, and there is
none else; I am God, and there is none like me, 46:10 Declaring the
end from the beginning, and from ancient times the things that are not
yet done, saying, My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my
pleasure: 46:11 Calling a ravenous bird from the east, the man that
executeth my counsel from a far country: yea, I have spoken it, I will
also bring it to pass; I have purposed it, I will also do it.

46:12 Hearken unto me, ye stouthearted, that are far from
righteousness: 46:13 I bring near my righteousness; it shall not be
far off, and my salvation shall not tarry: and I will place salvation
in Zion for Israel my glory.

47:1 Come down, and sit in the dust, O virgin daughter of Babylon, sit
on the ground: there is no throne, O daughter of the Chaldeans: for
thou shalt no more be called tender and delicate.

47:2 Take the millstones, and grind meal: uncover thy locks, make bare
the leg, uncover the thigh, pass over the rivers.

47:3 Thy nakedness shall be uncovered, yea, thy shame shall be seen: I
will take vengeance, and I will not meet thee as a man.

47:4 As for our redeemer, the LORD of hosts is his name, the Holy One
of Israel.

47:5 Sit thou silent, and get thee into darkness, O daughter of the
Chaldeans: for thou shalt no more be called, The lady of kingdoms.

47:6 I was wroth with my people, I have polluted mine inheritance, and
given them into thine hand: thou didst shew them no mercy; upon the
ancient hast thou very heavily laid thy yoke.

47:7 And thou saidst, I shall be a lady for ever: so that thou didst
not lay these things to thy heart, neither didst remember the latter
end of it.

47:8 Therefore hear now this, thou that art given to pleasures, that
dwellest carelessly, that sayest in thine heart, I am, and none else
beside me; I shall not sit as a widow, neither shall I know the loss
of children: 47:9 But these two things shall come to thee in a moment
in one day, the loss of children, and widowhood: they shall come upon
thee in their perfection for the multitude of thy sorceries, and for
the great abundance of thine enchantments.

47:10 For thou hast trusted in thy wickedness: thou hast said, None
seeth me. Thy wisdom and thy knowledge, it hath perverted thee; and
thou hast said in thine heart, I am, and none else beside me.

47:11 Therefore shall evil come upon thee; thou shalt not know from
whence it riseth: and mischief shall fall upon thee; thou shalt not be
able to put it off: and desolation shall come upon thee suddenly,
which thou shalt not know.

47:12 Stand now with thine enchantments, and with the multitude of thy
sorceries, wherein thou hast laboured from thy youth; if so be thou
shalt be able to profit, if so be thou mayest prevail.

47:13 Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy counsels. Let now the
astrologers, the stargazers, the monthly prognosticators, stand up,
and save thee from these things that shall come upon thee.

47:14 Behold, they shall be as stubble; the fire shall burn them; they
shall not deliver themselves from the power of the flame: there shall
not be a coal to warm at, nor fire to sit before it.

47:15 Thus shall they be unto thee with whom thou hast laboured, even
thy merchants, from thy youth: they shall wander every one to his
quarter; none shall save thee.

48:1 Hear ye this, O house of Jacob, which are called by the name of
Israel, and are come forth out of the waters of Judah, which swear by
the name of the LORD, and make mention of the God of Israel, but not
in truth, nor in righteousness.

48:2 For they call themselves of the holy city, and stay themselves
upon the God of Israel; The LORD of hosts is his name.

48:3 I have declared the former things from the beginning; and they
went forth out of my mouth, and I shewed them; I did them suddenly,
and they came to pass.

48:4 Because I knew that thou art obstinate, and thy neck is an iron
sinew, and thy brow brass; 48:5 I have even from the beginning
declared it to thee; before it came to pass I shewed it thee: lest
thou shouldest say, Mine idol hath done them, and my graven image, and
my molten image, hath commanded them.

48:6 Thou hast heard, see all this; and will not ye declare it? I have
shewed thee new things from this time, even hidden things, and thou
didst not know them.

48:7 They are created now, and not from the beginning; even before the
day when thou heardest them not; lest thou shouldest say, Behold, I
knew them.

48:8 Yea, thou heardest not; yea, thou knewest not; yea, from that
time that thine ear was not opened: for I knew that thou wouldest deal
very treacherously, and wast called a transgressor from the womb.

48:9 For my name's sake will I defer mine anger, and for my praise
will I refrain for thee, that I cut thee not off.

48:10 Behold, I have refined thee, but not with silver; I have chosen
thee in the furnace of affliction.

48:11 For mine own sake, even for mine own sake, will I do it: for how
should my name be polluted? and I will not give my glory unto another.

48:12 Hearken unto me, O Jacob and Israel, my called; I am he; I am
the first, I also am the last.

48:13 Mine hand also hath laid the foundation of the earth, and my
right hand hath spanned the heavens: when I call unto them, they stand
up together.

48:14 All ye, assemble yourselves, and hear; which among them hath
declared these things? The LORD hath loved him: he will do his
pleasure on Babylon, and his arm shall be on the Chaldeans.

48:15 I, even I, have spoken; yea, I have called him: I have brought
him, and he shall make his way prosperous.

48:16 Come ye near unto me, hear ye this; I have not spoken in secret
from the beginning; from the time that it was, there am I: and now the
Lord GOD, and his Spirit, hath sent me.

48:17 Thus saith the LORD, thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel; I am
the LORD thy God which teacheth thee to profit, which leadeth thee by
the way that thou shouldest go.

48:18 O that thou hadst hearkened to my commandments! then had thy
peace been as a river, and thy righteousness as the waves of the sea:
48:19 Thy seed also had been as the sand, and the offspring of thy
bowels like the gravel thereof; his name should not have been cut off
nor destroyed from before me.

48:20 Go ye forth of Babylon, flee ye from the Chaldeans, with a voice
of singing declare ye, tell this, utter it even to the end of the
earth; say ye, The LORD hath redeemed his servant Jacob.

48:21 And they thirsted not when he led them through the deserts: he
caused the waters to flow out of the rock for them: he clave the rock
also, and the waters gushed out.

48:22 There is no peace, saith the LORD, unto the wicked.

49:1 Listen, O isles, unto me; and hearken, ye people, from far; The
LORD hath called me from the womb; from the bowels of my mother hath
he made mention of my name.

49:2 And he hath made my mouth like a sharp sword; in the shadow of
his hand hath he hid me, and made me a polished shaft; in his quiver
hath he hid me; 49:3 And said unto me, Thou art my servant, O Israel,
in whom I will be glorified.

49:4 Then I said, I have laboured in vain, I have spent my strength
for nought, and in vain: yet surely my judgment is with the LORD, and
my work with my God.

49:5 And now, saith the LORD that formed me from the womb to be his
servant, to bring Jacob again to him, Though Israel be not gathered,
yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the LORD, and my God shall be
my strength.

49:6 And he said, It is a light thing that thou shouldest be my
servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved
of Israel: I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that
thou mayest be my salvation unto the end of the earth.

49:7 Thus saith the LORD, the Redeemer of Israel, and his Holy One, to
him whom man despiseth, to him whom the nation abhorreth, to a servant
of rulers, Kings shall see and arise, princes also shall worship,
because of the LORD that is faithful, and the Holy One of Israel, and
he shall choose thee.

49:8 Thus saith the LORD, In an acceptable time have I heard thee, and
in a day of salvation have I helped thee: and I will preserve thee,
and give thee for a covenant of the people, to establish the earth, to
cause to inherit the desolate heritages; 49:9 That thou mayest say to
the prisoners, Go forth; to them that are in darkness, Shew
yourselves. They shall feed in the ways, and their pastures shall be
in all high places.

49:10 They shall not hunger nor thirst; neither shall the heat nor sun
smite them: for he that hath mercy on them shall lead them, even by
the springs of water shall he guide them.

49:11 And I will make all my mountains a way, and my highways shall be
exalted.

49:12 Behold, these shall come from far: and, lo, these from the north
and from the west; and these from the land of Sinim.

49:13 Sing, O heavens; and be joyful, O earth; and break forth into
singing, O mountains: for the LORD hath comforted his people, and will
have mercy upon his afflicted.

49:14 But Zion said, The LORD hath forsaken me, and my Lord hath
forgotten me.

49:15 Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have
compassion on the son of her womb? yea, they may forget, yet will I
not forget thee.

49:16 Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands; thy walls
are continually before me.

49:17 Thy children shall make haste; thy destroyers and they that made
thee waste shall go forth of thee.

49:18 Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold: all these gather
themselves together, and come to thee. As I live, saith the LORD, thou
shalt surely clothe thee with them all, as with an ornament, and bind
them on thee, as a bride doeth.

49:19 For thy waste and thy desolate places, and the land of thy
destruction, shall even now be too narrow by reason of the
inhabitants, and they that swallowed thee up shall be far away.

49:20 The children which thou shalt have, after thou hast lost the
other, shall say again in thine ears, The place is too strait for me:
give place to me that I may dwell.

49:21 Then shalt thou say in thine heart, Who hath begotten me these,
seeing I have lost my children, and am desolate, a captive, and
removing to and fro? and who hath brought up these? Behold, I was left
alone; these, where had they been?  49:22 Thus saith the Lord GOD,
Behold, I will lift up mine hand to the Gentiles, and set up my
standard to the people: and they shall bring thy sons in their arms,
and thy daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders.

49:23 And kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and their queens thy
nursing mothers: they shall bow down to thee with their face toward
the earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet; and thou shalt know that
I am the LORD: for they shall not be ashamed that wait for me.

49:24 Shall the prey be taken from the mighty, or the lawful captive
delivered?  49:25 But thus saith the LORD, Even the captives of the
mighty shall be taken away, and the prey of the terrible shall be
delivered: for I will contend with him that contendeth with thee, and
I will save thy children.

49:26 And I will feed them that oppress thee with their own flesh; and
they shall be drunken with their own blood, as with sweet wine: and
all flesh shall know that I the LORD am thy Saviour and thy Redeemer,
the mighty One of Jacob.

50:1 Thus saith the LORD, Where is the bill of your mother's
divorcement, whom I have put away? or which of my creditors is it to
whom I have sold you?  Behold, for your iniquities have ye sold
yourselves, and for your transgressions is your mother put away.

50:2 Wherefore, when I came, was there no man? when I called, was
there none to answer? Is my hand shortened at all, that it cannot
redeem? or have I no power to deliver? behold, at my rebuke I dry up
the sea, I make the rivers a wilderness: their fish stinketh, because
there is no water, and dieth for thirst.

50:3 I clothe the heavens with blackness, and I make sackcloth their
covering.

50:4 The Lord GOD hath given me the tongue of the learned, that I
should know how to speak a word in season to him that is weary: he
wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the
learned.

50:5 The Lord GOD hath opened mine ear, and I was not rebellious,
neither turned away back.

50:6 I gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked
off the hair: I hid not my face from shame and spitting.

50:7 For the Lord GOD will help me; therefore shall I not be
confounded: therefore have I set my face like a flint, and I know that
I shall not be ashamed.

50:8 He is near that justifieth me; who will contend with me? let us
stand together: who is mine adversary? let him come near to me.

50:9 Behold, the Lord GOD will help me; who is he that shall condemn
me?  lo, they all shall wax old as a garment; the moth shall eat them
up.

50:10 Who is among you that feareth the LORD, that obeyeth the voice
of his servant, that walketh in darkness, and hath no light? let him
trust in the name of the LORD, and stay upon his God.

50:11 Behold, all ye that kindle a fire, that compass yourselves about
with sparks: walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye
have kindled. This shall ye have of mine hand; ye shall lie down in
sorrow.

51:1 Hearken to me, ye that follow after righteousness, ye that seek
the LORD: look unto the rock whence ye are hewn, and to the hole of
the pit whence ye are digged.

51:2 Look unto Abraham your father, and unto Sarah that bare you: for
I called him alone, and blessed him, and increased him.

51:3 For the LORD shall comfort Zion: he will comfort all her waste
places; and he will make her wilderness like Eden, and her desert like
the garden of the LORD; joy and gladness shall be found therein,
thanksgiving, and the voice of melody.

51:4 Hearken unto me, my people; and give ear unto me, O my nation:
for a law shall proceed from me, and I will make my judgment to rest
for a light of the people.

51:5 My righteousness is near; my salvation is gone forth, and mine
arms shall judge the people; the isles shall wait upon me, and on mine
arm shall they trust.

51:6 Lift up your eyes to the heavens, and look upon the earth
beneath: for the heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth
shall wax old like a garment, and they that dwell therein shall die in
like manner: but my salvation shall be for ever, and my righteousness
shall not be abolished.

51:7 Hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness, the people in whose
heart is my law; fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid
of their revilings.

51:8 For the moth shall eat them up like a garment, and the worm shall
eat them like wool: but my righteousness shall be for ever, and my
salvation from generation to generation.

51:9 Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of the LORD; awake, as in
the ancient days, in the generations of old. Art thou not it that hath
cut Rahab, and wounded the dragon?  51:10 Art thou not it which hath
dried the sea, the waters of the great deep; that hath made the depths
of the sea a way for the ransomed to pass over?  51:11 Therefore the
redeemed of the LORD shall return, and come with singing unto Zion;
and everlasting joy shall be upon their head: they shall obtain
gladness and joy; and sorrow and mourning shall flee away.

51:12 I, even I, am he that comforteth you: who art thou, that thou
shouldest be afraid of a man that shall die, and of the son of man
which shall be made as grass; 51:13 And forgettest the LORD thy maker,
that hath stretched forth the heavens, and laid the foundations of the
earth; and hast feared continually every day because of the fury of
the oppressor, as if he were ready to destroy? and where is the fury
of the oppressor?  51:14 The captive exile hasteneth that he may be
loosed, and that he should not die in the pit, nor that his bread
should fail.

51:15 But I am the LORD thy God, that divided the sea, whose waves
roared: The LORD of hosts is his name.

51:16 And I have put my words in thy mouth, and I have covered thee in
the shadow of mine hand, that I may plant the heavens, and lay the
foundations of the earth, and say unto Zion, Thou art my people.

51:17 Awake, awake, stand up, O Jerusalem, which hast drunk at the
hand of the LORD the cup of his fury; thou hast drunken the dregs of
the cup of trembling, and wrung them out.

51:18 There is none to guide her among all the sons whom she hath
brought forth; neither is there any that taketh her by the hand of all
the sons that she hath brought up.

51:19 These two things are come unto thee; who shall be sorry for
thee?  desolation, and destruction, and the famine, and the sword: by
whom shall I comfort thee?  51:20 Thy sons have fainted, they lie at
the head of all the streets, as a wild bull in a net: they are full of
the fury of the LORD, the rebuke of thy God.

51:21 Therefore hear now this, thou afflicted, and drunken, but not
with wine: 51:22 Thus saith thy Lord the LORD, and thy God that
pleadeth the cause of his people, Behold, I have taken out of thine
hand the cup of trembling, even the dregs of the cup of my fury; thou
shalt no more drink it again: 51:23 But I will put it into the hand of
them that afflict thee; which have said to thy soul, Bow down, that we
may go over: and thou hast laid thy body as the ground, and as the
street, to them that went over.

52:1 Awake, awake; put on thy strength, O Zion; put on thy beautiful
garments, O Jerusalem, the holy city: for henceforth there shall no
more come into thee the uncircumcised and the unclean.

52:2 Shake thyself from the dust; arise, and sit down, O Jerusalem:
loose thyself from the bands of thy neck, O captive daughter of Zion.

52:3 For thus saith the LORD, Ye have sold yourselves for nought; and
ye shall be redeemed without money.

52:4 For thus saith the Lord GOD, My people went down aforetime into
Egypt to sojourn there; and the Assyrian oppressed them without cause.

52:5 Now therefore, what have I here, saith the LORD, that my people
is taken away for nought? they that rule over them make them to howl,
saith the LORD; and my name continually every day is blasphemed.

52:6 Therefore my people shall know my name: therefore they shall know
in that day that I am he that doth speak: behold, it is I.

52:7 How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that
bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace; that bringeth good
tidings of good, that publisheth salvation; that saith unto Zion, Thy
God reigneth!  52:8 Thy watchmen shall lift up the voice; with the
voice together shall they sing: for they shall see eye to eye, when
the LORD shall bring again Zion.

52:9 Break forth into joy, sing together, ye waste places of
Jerusalem: for the LORD hath comforted his people, he hath redeemed
Jerusalem.

52:10 The LORD hath made bare his holy arm in the eyes of all the
nations; and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of our
God.

52:11 Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence, touch no unclean
thing; go ye out of the midst of her; be ye clean, that bear the
vessels of the LORD.

52:12 For ye shall not go out with haste, nor go by flight: for the
LORD will go before you; and the God of Israel will be your rereward.

52:13 Behold, my servant shall deal prudently, he shall be exalted and
extolled, and be very high.

52:14 As many were astonied at thee; his visage was so marred more
than any man, and his form more than the sons of men: 52:15 So shall
he sprinkle many nations; the kings shall shut their mouths at him:
for that which had not been told them shall they see; and that which
they had not heard shall they consider.

53:1 Who hath believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the LORD
revealed?  53:2 For he shall grow up before him as a tender plant, and
as a root out of a dry ground: he hath no form nor comeliness; and
when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him.

53:3 He is despised and rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and
acquainted with grief: and we hid as it were our faces from him; he
was despised, and we esteemed him not.

53:4 Surely he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows: yet we
did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted.

53:5 But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our
iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his
stripes we are healed.

53:6 All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to
his own way; and the LORD hath laid on him the iniquity of us all.

53:7 He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his
mouth: he is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before
her shearers is dumb, so he openeth not his mouth.

53:8 He was taken from prison and from judgment: and who shall declare
his generation? for he was cut off out of the land of the living: for
the transgression of my people was he stricken.

53:9 And he made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his
death; because he had done no violence, neither was any deceit in his
mouth.

53:10 Yet it pleased the LORD to bruise him; he hath put him to grief:
when thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his
seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the LORD shall
prosper in his hand.

53:11 He shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied:
by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many; for he shall
bear their iniquities.

53:12 Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great, and he
shall divide the spoil with the strong; because he hath poured out his
soul unto death: and he was numbered with the transgressors; and he
bare the sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors.

54:1 Sing, O barren, thou that didst not bear; break forth into
singing, and cry aloud, thou that didst not travail with child: for
more are the children of the desolate than the children of the married
wife, saith the LORD.

54:2 Enlarge the place of thy tent, and let them stretch forth the
curtains of thine habitations: spare not, lengthen thy cords, and
strengthen thy stakes; 54:3 For thou shalt break forth on the right
hand and on the left; and thy seed shall inherit the Gentiles, and
make the desolate cities to be inhabited.

54:4 Fear not; for thou shalt not be ashamed: neither be thou
confounded; for thou shalt not be put to shame: for thou shalt forget
the shame of thy youth, and shalt not remember the reproach of thy
widowhood any more.

54:5 For thy Maker is thine husband; the LORD of hosts is his name;
and thy Redeemer the Holy One of Israel; The God of the whole earth
shall he be called.

54:6 For the LORD hath called thee as a woman forsaken and grieved in
spirit, and a wife of youth, when thou wast refused, saith thy God.

54:7 For a small moment have I forsaken thee; but with great mercies
will I gather thee.

54:8 In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment; but with
everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, saith the LORD thy
Redeemer.

54:9 For this is as the waters of Noah unto me: for as I have sworn
that the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth; so have I
sworn that I would not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee.

54:10 For the mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed; but my
kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my
peace be removed, saith the LORD that hath mercy on thee.

54:11 O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not comforted,
behold, I will lay thy stones with fair colours, and lay thy
foundations with sapphires.

54:12 And I will make thy windows of agates, and thy gates of
carbuncles, and all thy borders of pleasant stones.

54:13 And all thy children shall be taught of the LORD; and great
shall be the peace of thy children.

54:14 In righteousness shalt thou be established: thou shalt be far
from oppression; for thou shalt not fear: and from terror; for it
shall not come near thee.

54:15 Behold, they shall surely gather together, but not by me:
whosoever shall gather together against thee shall fall for thy sake.

54:16 Behold, I have created the smith that bloweth the coals in the
fire, and that bringeth forth an instrument for his work; and I have
created the waster to destroy.

54:17 No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper; and every
tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment thou shalt condemn.
This is the heritage of the servants of the LORD, and their
righteousness is of me, saith the LORD.

55:1 Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters, and he that
hath no money; come ye, buy, and eat; yea, come, buy wine and milk
without money and without price.

55:2 Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is not bread? and your
labour for that which satisfieth not? hearken diligently unto me, and
eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight itself in
fatness.

55:3 Incline your ear, and come unto me: hear, and your soul shall
live; and I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure
mercies of David.

55:4 Behold, I have given him for a witness to the people, a leader
and commander to the people.

55:5 Behold, thou shalt call a nation that thou knowest not, and
nations that knew not thee shall run unto thee because of the LORD thy
God, and for the Holy One of Israel; for he hath glorified thee.

55:6 Seek ye the LORD while he may be found, call ye upon him while he
is near: 55:7 Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man
his thoughts: and let him return unto the LORD, and he will have mercy
upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.

55:8 For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my
ways, saith the LORD.

55:9 For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways
higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts.

55:10 For as the rain cometh down, and the snow from heaven, and
returneth not thither, but watereth the earth, and maketh it bring
forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to the
eater: 55:11 So shall my word be that goeth forth out of my mouth: it
shall not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I
please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it.

55:12 For ye shall go out with joy, and be led forth with peace: the
mountains and the hills shall break forth before you into singing, and
all the trees of the field shall clap their hands.

55:13 Instead of the thorn shall come up the fir tree, and instead of
the brier shall come up the myrtle tree: and it shall be to the LORD
for a name, for an everlasting sign that shall not be cut off.

56:1 Thus saith the LORD, Keep ye judgment, and do justice: for my
salvation is near to come, and my righteousness to be revealed.

56:2 Blessed is the man that doeth this, and the son of man that
layeth hold on it; that keepeth the sabbath from polluting it, and
keepeth his hand from doing any evil.

56:3 Neither let the son of the stranger, that hath joined himself to
the LORD, speak, saying, The LORD hath utterly separated me from his
people: neither let the eunuch say, Behold, I am a dry tree.

56:4 For thus saith the LORD unto the eunuchs that keep my sabbaths,
and choose the things that please me, and take hold of my covenant;
56:5 Even unto them will I give in mine house and within my walls a
place and a name better than of sons and of daughters: I will give
them an everlasting name, that shall not be cut off.

56:6 Also the sons of the stranger, that join themselves to the LORD,
to serve him, and to love the name of the LORD, to be his servants,
every one that keepeth the sabbath from polluting it, and taketh hold
of my covenant; 56:7 Even them will I bring to my holy mountain, and
make them joyful in my house of prayer: their burnt offerings and
their sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine altar; for mine house
shall be called an house of prayer for all people.

56:8 The Lord GOD, which gathereth the outcasts of Israel saith, Yet
will I gather others to him, beside those that are gathered unto him.

56:9 All ye beasts of the field, come to devour, yea, all ye beasts in
the forest.

56:10 His watchmen are blind: they are all ignorant, they are all dumb
dogs, they cannot bark; sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber.

56:11 Yea, they are greedy dogs which can never have enough, and they
are shepherds that cannot understand: they all look to their own way,
every one for his gain, from his quarter.

56:12 Come ye, say they, I will fetch wine, and we will fill ourselves
with strong drink; and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more
abundant.

57:1 The righteous perisheth, and no man layeth it to heart: and
merciful men are taken away, none considering that the righteous is
taken away from the evil to come.

57:2 He shall enter into peace: they shall rest in their beds, each
one walking in his uprightness.

57:3 But draw near hither, ye sons of the sorceress, the seed of the
adulterer and the whore.

57:4 Against whom do ye sport yourselves? against whom make ye a wide
mouth, and draw out the tongue? are ye not children of transgression,
a seed of falsehood.

57:5 Enflaming yourselves with idols under every green tree, slaying
the children in the valleys under the clifts of the rocks?  57:6 Among
the smooth stones of the stream is thy portion; they, they are thy
lot: even to them hast thou poured a drink offering, thou hast offered
a meat offering. Should I receive comfort in these?  57:7 Upon a lofty
and high mountain hast thou set thy bed: even thither wentest thou up
to offer sacrifice.

57:8 Behind the doors also and the posts hast thou set up thy
remembrance: for thou hast discovered thyself to another than me, and
art gone up; thou hast enlarged thy bed, and made thee a covenant with
them; thou lovedst their bed where thou sawest it.

57:9 And thou wentest to the king with ointment, and didst increase
thy perfumes, and didst send thy messengers far off, and didst debase
thyself even unto hell.

57:10 Thou art wearied in the greatness of thy way; yet saidst thou
not, There is no hope: thou hast found the life of thine hand;
therefore thou wast not grieved.

57:11 And of whom hast thou been afraid or feared, that thou hast
lied, and hast not remembered me, nor laid it to thy heart? have not I
held my peace even of old, and thou fearest me not?  57:12 I will
declare thy righteousness, and thy works; for they shall not profit
thee.

57:13 When thou criest, let thy companies deliver thee; but the wind
shall carry them all away; vanity shall take them: but he that putteth
his trust in me shall possess the land, and shall inherit my holy
mountain; 57:14 And shall say, Cast ye up, cast ye up, prepare the
way, take up the stumblingblock out of the way of my people.

57:15 For thus saith the high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity,
whose name is Holy; I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also
that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the
humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones.

57:16 For I will not contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth:
for the spirit should fail before me, and the souls which I have made.

57:17 For the iniquity of his covetousness was I wroth, and smote him:
I hid me, and was wroth, and he went on frowardly in the way of his
heart.

57:18 I have seen his ways, and will heal him: I will lead him also,
and restore comforts unto him and to his mourners.

57:19 I create the fruit of the lips; Peace, peace to him that is far
off, and to him that is near, saith the LORD; and I will heal him.

57:20 But the wicked are like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest,
whose waters cast up mire and dirt.

57:21 There is no peace, saith my God, to the wicked.

58:1 Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and shew
my people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins.

58:2 Yet they seek me daily, and delight to know my ways, as a nation
that did righteousness, and forsook not the ordinance of their God:
they ask of me the ordinances of justice; they take delight in
approaching to God.

58:3 Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou seest not? wherefore
have we afflicted our soul, and thou takest no knowledge? Behold, in
the day of your fast ye find pleasure, and exact all your labours.

58:4 Behold, ye fast for strife and debate, and to smite with the fist
of wickedness: ye shall not fast as ye do this day, to make your voice
to be heard on high.

58:5 Is it such a fast that I have chosen? a day for a man to afflict
his soul? is it to bow down his head as a bulrush, and to spread
sackcloth and ashes under him? wilt thou call this a fast, and an
acceptable day to the LORD?  58:6 Is not this the fast that I have
chosen? to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens,
and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke?  58:7
Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the
poor that are cast out to thy house? when thou seest the naked, that
thou cover him; and that thou hide not thyself from thine own flesh?
58:8 Then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and thine health
shall spring forth speedily: and thy righteousness shall go before
thee; the glory of the LORD shall be thy rereward.

58:9 Then shalt thou call, and the LORD shall answer; thou shalt cry,
and he shall say, Here I am. If thou take away from the midst of thee
the yoke, the putting forth of the finger, and speaking vanity; 58:10
And if thou draw out thy soul to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted
soul; then shall thy light rise in obscurity, and thy darkness be as
the noon day: 58:11 And the LORD shall guide thee continually, and
satisfy thy soul in drought, and make fat thy bones: and thou shalt be
like a watered garden, and like a spring of water, whose waters fail
not.

58:12 And they that shall be of thee shall build the old waste places:
thou shalt raise up the foundations of many generations; and thou
shalt be called, The repairer of the breach, The restorer of paths to
dwell in.

58:13 If thou turn away thy foot from the sabbath, from doing thy
pleasure on my holy day; and call the sabbath a delight, the holy of
the LORD, honourable; and shalt honour him, not doing thine own ways,
nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words: 58:14
Then shalt thou delight thyself in the LORD; and I will cause thee to
ride upon the high places of the earth, and feed thee with the
heritage of Jacob thy father: for the mouth of the LORD hath spoken
it.

59:1 Behold, the LORD's hand is not shortened, that it cannot save;
neither his ear heavy, that it cannot hear: 59:2 But your iniquities
have separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid his
face from you, that he will not hear.

59:3 For your hands are defiled with blood, and your fingers with
iniquity; your lips have spoken lies, your tongue hath muttered
perverseness.

59:4 None calleth for justice, nor any pleadeth for truth: they trust
in vanity, and speak lies; they conceive mischief, and bring forth
iniquity.

59:5 They hatch cockatrice' eggs, and weave the spider's web: he that
eateth of their eggs dieth, and that which is crushed breaketh out
into a viper.

59:6 Their webs shall not become garments, neither shall they cover
themselves with their works: their works are works of iniquity, and
the act of violence is in their hands.

59:7 Their feet run to evil, and they make haste to shed innocent
blood: their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity; wasting and
destruction are in their paths.

59:8 The way of peace they know not; and there is no judgment in their
goings: they have made them crooked paths: whosoever goeth therein
shall not know peace.

59:9 Therefore is judgment far from us, neither doth justice overtake
us: we wait for light, but behold obscurity; for brightness, but we
walk in darkness.

59:10 We grope for the wall like the blind, and we grope as if we had
no eyes: we stumble at noon day as in the night; we are in desolate
places as dead men.

59:11 We roar all like bears, and mourn sore like doves: we look for
judgment, but there is none; for salvation, but it is far off from us.

59:12 For our transgressions are multiplied before thee, and our sins
testify against us: for our transgressions are with us; and as for our
iniquities, we know them; 59:13 In transgressing and lying against the
LORD, and departing away from our God, speaking oppression and revolt,
conceiving and uttering from the heart words of falsehood.

59:14 And judgment is turned away backward, and justice standeth afar
off: for truth is fallen in the street, and equity cannot enter.

59:15 Yea, truth faileth; and he that departeth from evil maketh
himself a prey: and the LORD saw it, and it displeased him that there
was no judgment.

59:16 And he saw that there was no man, and wondered that there was no
intercessor: therefore his arm brought salvation unto him; and his
righteousness, it sustained him.

59:17 For he put on righteousness as a breastplate, and an helmet of
salvation upon his head; and he put on the garments of vengeance for
clothing, and was clad with zeal as a cloak.

59:18 According to their deeds, accordingly he will repay, fury to his
adversaries, recompence to his enemies; to the islands he will repay
recompence.

59:19 So shall they fear the name of the LORD from the west, and his
glory from the rising of the sun. When the enemy shall come in like a
flood, the Spirit of the LORD shall lift up a standard against him.

59:20 And the Redeemer shall come to Zion, and unto them that turn
from transgression in Jacob, saith the LORD.

59:21 As for me, this is my covenant with them, saith the LORD; My
spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth,
shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed,
nor out of the mouth of thy seed's seed, saith the LORD, from
henceforth and for ever.

60:1 Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of the LORD is
risen upon thee.

60:2 For, behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross
darkness the people: but the LORD shall arise upon thee, and his glory
shall be seen upon thee.

60:3 And the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and kings to the
brightness of thy rising.

60:4 Lift up thine eyes round about, and see: all they gather
themselves together, they come to thee: thy sons shall come from far,
and thy daughters shall be nursed at thy side.

60:5 Then thou shalt see, and flow together, and thine heart shall
fear, and be enlarged; because the abundance of the sea shall be
converted unto thee, the forces of the Gentiles shall come unto thee.

60:6 The multitude of camels shall cover thee, the dromedaries of
Midian and Ephah; all they from Sheba shall come: they shall bring
gold and incense; and they shall shew forth the praises of the LORD.

60:7 All the flocks of Kedar shall be gathered together unto thee, the
rams of Nebaioth shall minister unto thee: they shall come up with
acceptance on mine altar, and I will glorify the house of my glory.

60:8 Who are these that fly as a cloud, and as the doves to their
windows?  60:9 Surely the isles shall wait for me, and the ships of
Tarshish first, to bring thy sons from far, their silver and their
gold with them, unto the name of the LORD thy God, and to the Holy One
of Israel, because he hath glorified thee.

60:10 And the sons of strangers shall build up thy walls, and their
kings shall minister unto thee: for in my wrath I smote thee, but in
my favour have I had mercy on thee.

60:11 Therefore thy gates shall be open continually; they shall not be
shut day nor night; that men may bring unto thee the forces of the
Gentiles, and that their kings may be brought.

60:12 For the nation and kingdom that will not serve thee shall
perish; yea, those nations shall be utterly wasted.

60:13 The glory of Lebanon shall come unto thee, the fir tree, the
pine tree, and the box together, to beautify the place of my
sanctuary; and I will make the place of my feet glorious.

60:14 The sons also of them that afflicted thee shall come bending
unto thee; and all they that despised thee shall bow themselves down
at the soles of thy feet; and they shall call thee; The city of the
LORD, The Zion of the Holy One of Israel.

60:15 Whereas thou has been forsaken and hated, so that no man went
through thee, I will make thee an eternal excellency, a joy of many
generations.

60:16 Thou shalt also suck the milk of the Gentiles, and shalt suck
the breast of kings: and thou shalt know that I the LORD am thy
Saviour and thy Redeemer, the mighty One of Jacob.

60:17 For brass I will bring gold, and for iron I will bring silver,
and for wood brass, and for stones iron: I will also make thy officers
peace, and thine exactors righteousness.

60:18 Violence shall no more be heard in thy land, wasting nor
destruction within thy borders; but thou shalt call thy walls
Salvation, and thy gates Praise.

60:19 The sun shall be no more thy light by day; neither for
brightness shall the moon give light unto thee: but the LORD shall be
unto thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory.

60:20 Thy sun shall no more go down; neither shall thy moon withdraw
itself: for the LORD shall be thine everlasting light, and the days of
thy mourning shall be ended.

60:21 Thy people also shall be all righteous: they shall inherit the
land for ever, the branch of my planting, the work of my hands, that I
may be glorified.

60:22 A little one shall become a thousand, and a small one a strong
nation: I the LORD will hasten it in his time.

61:1 The Spirit of the Lord GOD is upon me; because the LORD hath
anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek; he hath sent me to
bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and
the opening of the prison to them that are bound; 61:2 To proclaim the
acceptable year of the LORD, and the day of vengeance of our God; to
comfort all that mourn; 61:3 To appoint unto them that mourn in Zion,
to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the
garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness; that they might be
called trees of righteousness, the planting of the LORD, that he might
be glorified.

61:4 And they shall build the old wastes, they shall raise up the
former desolations, and they shall repair the waste cities, the
desolations of many generations.

61:5 And strangers shall stand and feed your flocks, and the sons of
the alien shall be your plowmen and your vinedressers.

61:6 But ye shall be named the Priests of the LORD: men shall call you
the Ministers of our God: ye shall eat the riches of the Gentiles, and
in their glory shall ye boast yourselves.

61:7 For your shame ye shall have double; and for confusion they shall
rejoice in their portion: therefore in their land they shall possess
the double: everlasting joy shall be unto them.

61:8 For I the LORD love judgment, I hate robbery for burnt offering;
and I will direct their work in truth, and I will make an everlasting
covenant with them.

61:9 And their seed shall be known among the Gentiles, and their
offspring among the people: all that see them shall acknowledge them,
that they are the seed which the LORD hath blessed.

61:10 I will greatly rejoice in the LORD, my soul shall be joyful in
my God; for he hath clothed me with the garments of salvation, he hath
covered me with the robe of righteousness, as a bridegroom decketh
himself with ornaments, and as a bride adorneth herself with her
jewels.

61:11 For as the earth bringeth forth her bud, and as the garden
causeth the things that are sown in it to spring forth; so the Lord
GOD will cause righteousness and praise to spring forth before all the
nations.

62:1 For Zion's sake will I not hold my peace, and for Jerusalem's
sake I will not rest, until the righteousness thereof go forth as
brightness, and the salvation thereof as a lamp that burneth.

62:2 And the Gentiles shall see thy righteousness, and all kings thy
glory: and thou shalt be called by a new name, which the mouth of the
LORD shall name.

62:3 Thou shalt also be a crown of glory in the hand of the LORD, and
a royal diadem in the hand of thy God.

62:4 Thou shalt no more be termed Forsaken; neither shall thy land any
more be termed Desolate: but thou shalt be called Hephzibah, and thy
land Beulah: for the LORD delighteth in thee, and thy land shall be
married.

62:5 For as a young man marrieth a virgin, so shall thy sons marry
thee: and as the bridegroom rejoiceth over the bride, so shall thy God
rejoice over thee.

62:6 I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O Jerusalem, which shall
never hold their peace day nor night: ye that make mention of the
LORD, keep not silence, 62:7 And give him no rest, till he establish,
and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth.

62:8 The LORD hath sworn by his right hand, and by the arm of his
strength, Surely I will no more give thy corn to be meat for thine
enemies; and the sons of the stranger shall not drink thy wine, for
the which thou hast laboured: 62:9 But they that have gathered it
shall eat it, and praise the LORD; and they that have brought it
together shall drink it in the courts of my holiness.

62:10 Go through, go through the gates; prepare ye the way of the
people; cast up, cast up the highway; gather out the stones; lift up a
standard for the people.

62:11 Behold, the LORD hath proclaimed unto the end of the world, Say
ye to the daughter of Zion, Behold, thy salvation cometh; behold, his
reward is with him, and his work before him.

62:12 And they shall call them, The holy people, The redeemed of the
LORD: and thou shalt be called, Sought out, A city not forsaken.

63:1 Who is this that cometh from Edom, with dyed garments from
Bozrah?  this that is glorious in his apparel, travelling in the
greatness of his strength? I that speak in righteousness, mighty to
save.

63:2 Wherefore art thou red in thine apparel, and thy garments like
him that treadeth in the winefat?  63:3 I have trodden the winepress
alone; and of the people there was none with me: for I will tread them
in mine anger, and trample them in my fury; and their blood shall be
sprinkled upon my garments, and I will stain all my raiment.

63:4 For the day of vengeance is in mine heart, and the year of my
redeemed is come.

63:5 And I looked, and there was none to help; and I wondered that
there was none to uphold: therefore mine own arm brought salvation
unto me; and my fury, it upheld me.

63:6 And I will tread down the people in mine anger, and make them
drunk in my fury, and I will bring down their strength to the earth.

63:7 I will mention the lovingkindnesses of the LORD, and the praises
of the LORD, according to all that the LORD hath bestowed on us, and
the great goodness toward the house of Israel, which he hath bestowed
on them according to his mercies, and according to the multitude of
his lovingkindnesses.

63:8 For he said, Surely they are my people, children that will not
lie: so he was their Saviour.

63:9 In all their affliction he was afflicted, and the angel of his
presence saved them: in his love and in his pity he redeemed them; and
he bare them, and carried them all the days of old.

63:10 But they rebelled, and vexed his holy Spirit: therefore he was
turned to be their enemy, and he fought against them.

63:11 Then he remembered the days of old, Moses, and his people,
saying, Where is he that brought them up out of the sea with the
shepherd of his flock? where is he that put his holy Spirit within
him?  63:12 That led them by the right hand of Moses with his glorious
arm, dividing the water before them, to make himself an everlasting
name?  63:13 That led them through the deep, as an horse in the
wilderness, that they should not stumble?  63:14 As a beast goeth down
into the valley, the Spirit of the LORD caused him to rest: so didst
thou lead thy people, to make thyself a glorious name.

63:15 Look down from heaven, and behold from the habitation of thy
holiness and of thy glory: where is thy zeal and thy strength, the
sounding of thy bowels and of thy mercies toward me? are they
restrained?  63:16 Doubtless thou art our father, though Abraham be
ignorant of us, and Israel acknowledge us not: thou, O LORD, art our
father, our redeemer; thy name is from everlasting.

63:17 O LORD, why hast thou made us to err from thy ways, and hardened
our heart from thy fear? Return for thy servants' sake, the tribes of
thine inheritance.

63:18 The people of thy holiness have possessed it but a little while:
our adversaries have trodden down thy sanctuary.

63:19 We are thine: thou never barest rule over them; they were not
called by thy name.

64:1 Oh that thou wouldest rend the heavens, that thou wouldest come
down, that the mountains might flow down at thy presence, 64:2 As when
the melting fire burneth, the fire causeth the waters to boil, to make
thy name known to thine adversaries, that the nations may tremble at
thy presence!  64:3 When thou didst terrible things which we looked
not for, thou camest down, the mountains flowed down at thy presence.

64:4 For since the beginning of the world men have not heard, nor
perceived by the ear, neither hath the eye seen, O God, beside thee,
what he hath prepared for him that waiteth for him.

64:5 Thou meetest him that rejoiceth and worketh righteousness, those
that remember thee in thy ways: behold, thou art wroth; for we have
sinned: in those is continuance, and we shall be saved.

64:6 But we are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses
are as filthy rags; and we all do fade as a leaf; and our iniquities,
like the wind, have taken us away.

64:7 And there is none that calleth upon thy name, that stirreth up
himself to take hold of thee: for thou hast hid thy face from us, and
hast consumed us, because of our iniquities.

64:8 But now, O LORD, thou art our father; we are the clay, and thou
our potter; and we all are the work of thy hand.

64:9 Be not wroth very sore, O LORD, neither remember iniquity for
ever: behold, see, we beseech thee, we are all thy people.

64:10 Thy holy cities are a wilderness, Zion is a wilderness,
Jerusalem a desolation.

64:11 Our holy and our beautiful house, where our fathers praised
thee, is burned up with fire: and all our pleasant things are laid
waste.

64:12 Wilt thou refrain thyself for these things, O LORD? wilt thou
hold thy peace, and afflict us very sore?  65:1 I am sought of them
that asked not for me; I am found of them that sought me not: I said,
Behold me, behold me, unto a nation that was not called by my name.

65:2 I have spread out my hands all the day unto a rebellious people,
which walketh in a way that was not good, after their own thoughts;
65:3 A people that provoketh me to anger continually to my face; that
sacrificeth in gardens, and burneth incense upon altars of brick; 65:4
Which remain among the graves, and lodge in the monuments, which eat
swine's flesh, and broth of abominable things is in their vessels;
65:5 Which say, Stand by thyself, come not near to me; for I am holier
than thou. These are a smoke in my nose, a fire that burneth all the
day.

65:6 Behold, it is written before me: I will not keep silence, but
will recompense, even recompense into their bosom, 65:7 Your
iniquities, and the iniquities of your fathers together, saith the
LORD, which have burned incense upon the mountains, and blasphemed me
upon the hills: therefore will I measure their former work into their
bosom.

65:8 Thus saith the LORD, As the new wine is found in the cluster, and
one saith, Destroy it not; for a blessing is in it: so will I do for
my servants' sakes, that I may not destroy them all.

65:9 And I will bring forth a seed out of Jacob, and out of Judah an
inheritor of my mountains: and mine elect shall inherit it, and my
servants shall dwell there.

65:10 And Sharon shall be a fold of flocks, and the valley of Achor a
place for the herds to lie down in, for my people that have sought me.

65:11 But ye are they that forsake the LORD, that forget my holy
mountain, that prepare a table for that troop, and that furnish the
drink offering unto that number.

65:12 Therefore will I number you to the sword, and ye shall all bow
down to the slaughter: because when I called, ye did not answer; when
I spake, ye did not hear; but did evil before mine eyes, and did
choose that wherein I delighted not.

65:13 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD, Behold, my servants shall
eat, but ye shall be hungry: behold, my servants shall drink, but ye
shall be thirsty: behold, my servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be
ashamed: 65:14 Behold, my servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye
shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall howl for vexation of spirit.

65:15 And ye shall leave your name for a curse unto my chosen: for the
Lord GOD shall slay thee, and call his servants by another name: 65:16
That he who blesseth himself in the earth shall bless himself in the
God of truth; and he that sweareth in the earth shall swear by the God
of truth; because the former troubles are forgotten, and because they
are hid from mine eyes.

65:17 For, behold, I create new heavens and a new earth: and the
former shall not be remembered, nor come into mind.

65:18 But be ye glad and rejoice for ever in that which I create: for,
behold, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy.

65:19 And I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in my people: and the
voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice of
crying.

65:20 There shall be no more thence an infant of days, nor an old man
that hath not filled his days: for the child shall die an hundred
years old; but the sinner being an hundred years old shall be
accursed.

65:21 And they shall build houses, and inhabit them; and they shall
plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of them.

65:22 They shall not build, and another inhabit; they shall not plant,
and another eat: for as the days of a tree are the days of my people,
and mine elect shall long enjoy the work of their hands.

65:23 They shall not labour in vain, nor bring forth for trouble; for
they are the seed of the blessed of the LORD, and their offspring with
them.

65:24 And it shall come to pass, that before they call, I will answer;
and while they are yet speaking, I will hear.

65:25 The wolf and the lamb shall feed together, and the lion shall
eat straw like the bullock: and dust shall be the serpent's meat. They
shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, saith the LORD.

66:1 Thus saith the LORD, The heaven is my throne, and the earth is my
footstool: where is the house that ye build unto me? and where is the
place of my rest?  66:2 For all those things hath mine hand made, and
all those things have been, saith the LORD: but to this man will I
look, even to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, and trembleth
at my word.

66:3 He that killeth an ox is as if he slew a man; he that sacrificeth
a lamb, as if he cut off a dog's neck; he that offereth an oblation,
as if he offered swine's blood; he that burneth incense, as if he
blessed an idol.

Yea, they have chosen their own ways, and their soul delighteth in
their abominations.

66:4 I also will choose their delusions, and will bring their fears
upon them; because when I called, none did answer; when I spake, they
did not hear: but they did evil before mine eyes, and chose that in
which I delighted not.

66:5 Hear the word of the LORD, ye that tremble at his word; Your
brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my name's sake, said,
Let the LORD be glorified: but he shall appear to your joy, and they
shall be ashamed.

66:6 A voice of noise from the city, a voice from the temple, a voice
of the LORD that rendereth recompence to his enemies.

66:7 Before she travailed, she brought forth; before her pain came,
she was delivered of a man child.

66:8 Who hath heard such a thing? who hath seen such things? Shall the
earth be made to bring forth in one day? or shall a nation be born at
once?  for as soon as Zion travailed, she brought forth her children.

66:9 Shall I bring to the birth, and not cause to bring forth? saith
the LORD: shall I cause to bring forth, and shut the womb? saith thy
God.

66:10 Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad with her, all ye that
love her: rejoice for joy with her, all ye that mourn for her: 66:11
That ye may suck, and be satisfied with the breasts of her
consolations; that ye may milk out, and be delighted with the
abundance of her glory.

66:12 For thus saith the LORD, Behold, I will extend peace to her like
a river, and the glory of the Gentiles like a flowing stream: then
shall ye suck, ye shall be borne upon her sides, and be dandled upon
her knees.

66:13 As one whom his mother comforteth, so will I comfort you; and ye
shall be comforted in Jerusalem.

66:14 And when ye see this, your heart shall rejoice, and your bones
shall flourish like an herb: and the hand of the LORD shall be known
toward his servants, and his indignation toward his enemies.

66:15 For, behold, the LORD will come with fire, and with his chariots
like a whirlwind, to render his anger with fury, and his rebuke with
flames of fire.

66:16 For by fire and by his sword will the LORD plead with all flesh:
and the slain of the LORD shall be many.

66:17 They that sanctify themselves, and purify themselves in the
gardens behind one tree in the midst, eating swine's flesh, and the
abomination, and the mouse, shall be consumed together, saith the
LORD.

66:18 For I know their works and their thoughts: it shall come, that I
will gather all nations and tongues; and they shall come, and see my
glory.

66:19 And I will set a sign among them, and I will send those that
escape of them unto the nations, to Tarshish, Pul, and Lud, that draw
the bow, to Tubal, and Javan, to the isles afar off, that have not
heard my fame, neither have seen my glory; and they shall declare my
glory among the Gentiles.

66:20 And they shall bring all your brethren for an offering unto the
LORD out of all nations upon horses, and in chariots, and in litters,
and upon mules, and upon swift beasts, to my holy mountain Jerusalem,
saith the LORD, as the children of Israel bring an offering in a clean
vessel into the house of the LORD.

66:21 And I will also take of them for priests and for Levites, saith
the LORD.

66:22 For as the new heavens and the new earth, which I will make,
shall remain before me, saith the LORD, so shall your seed and your
name remain.

66:23 And it shall come to pass, that from one new moon to another,
and from one sabbath to another, shall all flesh come to worship
before me, saith the LORD.

66:24 And they shall go forth, and look upon the carcases of the men
that have transgressed against me: for their worm shall not die,
neither shall their fire be quenched; and they shall be an abhorring
unto all flesh.




The Book of the Prophet Jeremiah


1:1 The words of Jeremiah the son of Hilkiah, of the priests that
were in Anathoth in the land of Benjamin: 1:2 To whom the word of the
LORD came in the days of Josiah the son of Amon king of Judah, in the
thirteenth year of his reign.

1:3 It came also in the days of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of
Judah, unto the end of the eleventh year of Zedekiah the son of Josiah
king of Judah, unto the carrying away of Jerusalem captive in the
fifth month.

1:4 Then the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 1:5 Before I
formed thee in the belly I knew thee; and before thou camest forth out
of the womb I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee a prophet unto the
nations.

1:6 Then said I, Ah, Lord GOD! behold, I cannot speak: for I am a
child.

1:7 But the LORD said unto me, Say not, I am a child: for thou shalt
go to all that I shall send thee, and whatsoever I command thee thou
shalt speak.

1:8 Be not afraid of their faces: for I am with thee to deliver thee,
saith the LORD.

1:9 Then the LORD put forth his hand, and touched my mouth. And the
LORD said unto me, Behold, I have put my words in thy mouth.

1:10 See, I have this day set thee over the nations and over the
kingdoms, to root out, and to pull down, and to destroy, and to throw
down, to build, and to plant.

1:11 Moreover the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, Jeremiah,
what seest thou? And I said, I see a rod of an almond tree.

1:12 Then said the LORD unto me, Thou hast well seen: for I will
hasten my word to perform it.

1:13 And the word of the LORD came unto me the second time, saying,
What seest thou? And I said, I see a seething pot; and the face
thereof is toward the north.

1:14 Then the LORD said unto me, Out of the north an evil shall break
forth upon all the inhabitants of the land.

1:15 For, lo, I will call all the families of the kingdoms of the
north, saith the LORD; and they shall come, and they shall set every
one his throne at the entering of the gates of Jerusalem, and against
all the walls thereof round about, and against all the cities of
Judah.

1:16 And I will utter my judgments against them touching all their
wickedness, who have forsaken me, and have burned incense unto other
gods, and worshipped the works of their own hands.

1:17 Thou therefore gird up thy loins, and arise, and speak unto them
all that I command thee: be not dismayed at their faces, lest I
confound thee before them.

1:18 For, behold, I have made thee this day a defenced city, and an
iron pillar, and brasen walls against the whole land, against the
kings of Judah, against the princes thereof, against the priests
thereof, and against the people of the land.

1:19 And they shall fight against thee; but they shall not prevail
against thee; for I am with thee, saith the LORD, to deliver thee.

2:1 Moreover the word of the LORD came to me, saying, 2:2 Go and cry
in the ears of Jerusalem, saying, Thus saith the LORD; I remember
thee, the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals, when
thou wentest after me in the wilderness, in a land that was not sown.

2:3 Israel was holiness unto the LORD, and the firstfruits of his
increase: all that devour him shall offend; evil shall come upon them,
saith the LORD.

2:4 Hear ye the word of the LORD, O house of Jacob, and all the
families of the house of Israel: 2:5 Thus saith the LORD, What
iniquity have your fathers found in me, that they are gone far from
me, and have walked after vanity, and are become vain?  2:6 Neither
said they, Where is the LORD that brought us up out of the land of
Egypt, that led us through the wilderness, through a land of deserts
and of pits, through a land of drought, and of the shadow of death,
through a land that no man passed through, and where no man dwelt?
2:7 And I brought you into a plentiful country, to eat the fruit
thereof and the goodness thereof; but when ye entered, ye defiled my
land, and made mine heritage an abomination.

2:8 The priests said not, Where is the LORD? and they that handle the
law knew me not: the pastors also transgressed against me, and the
prophets prophesied by Baal, and walked after things that do not
profit.

2:9 Wherefore I will yet plead with you, saith the LORD, and with your
children's children will I plead.

2:10 For pass over the isles of Chittim, and see; and send unto Kedar,
and consider diligently, and see if there be such a thing.

2:11 Hath a nation changed their gods, which are yet no gods? but my
people have changed their glory for that which doth not profit.

2:12 Be astonished, O ye heavens, at this, and be horribly afraid, be
ye very desolate, saith the LORD.

2:13 For my people have committed two evils; they have forsaken me the
fountain of living waters, and hewed them out cisterns, broken
cisterns, that can hold no water.

2:14 Is Israel a servant? is he a homeborn slave? why is he spoiled?
2:15 The young lions roared upon him, and yelled, and they made his
land waste: his cities are burned without inhabitant.

2:16 Also the children of Noph and Tahapanes have broken the crown of
thy head.

2:17 Hast thou not procured this unto thyself, in that thou hast
forsaken the LORD thy God, when he led thee by the way?  2:18 And now
what hast thou to do in the way of Egypt, to drink the waters of
Sihor? or what hast thou to do in the way of Assyria, to drink the
waters of the river?  2:19 Thine own wickedness shall correct thee,
and thy backslidings shall reprove thee: know therefore and see that
it is an evil thing and bitter, that thou hast forsaken the LORD thy
God, and that my fear is not in thee, saith the Lord GOD of hosts.

2:20 For of old time I have broken thy yoke, and burst thy bands; and
thou saidst, I will not transgress; when upon every high hill and
under every green tree thou wanderest, playing the harlot.

2:21 Yet I had planted thee a noble vine, wholly a right seed: how
then art thou turned into the degenerate plant of a strange vine unto
me?  2:22 For though thou wash thee with nitre, and take thee much
soap, yet thine iniquity is marked before me, saith the Lord GOD.

2:23 How canst thou say, I am not polluted, I have not gone after
Baalim?  see thy way in the valley, know what thou hast done: thou art
a swift dromedary traversing her ways; 2:24 A wild ass used to the
wilderness, that snuffeth up the wind at her pleasure; in her occasion
who can turn her away? all they that seek her will not weary
themselves; in her month they shall find her.

2:25 Withhold thy foot from being unshod, and thy throat from thirst:
but thou saidst, There is no hope: no; for I have loved strangers, and
after them will I go.

2:26 As the thief is ashamed when he is found, so is the house of
Israel ashamed; they, their kings, their princes, and their priests,
and their prophets.

2:27 Saying to a stock, Thou art my father; and to a stone, Thou hast
brought me forth: for they have turned their back unto me, and not
their face: but in the time of their trouble they will say, Arise, and
save us.

2:28 But where are thy gods that thou hast made thee? let them arise,
if they can save thee in the time of thy trouble: for according to the
number of thy cities are thy gods, O Judah.

2:29 Wherefore will ye plead with me? ye all have transgressed against
me, saith the LORD.

2:30 In vain have I smitten your children; they received no
correction: your own sword hath devoured your prophets, like a
destroying lion.

2:31 O generation, see ye the word of the LORD. Have I been a
wilderness unto Israel? a land of darkness? wherefore say my people,
We are lords; we will come no more unto thee?  2:32 Can a maid forget
her ornaments, or a bride her attire? yet my people have forgotten me
days without number.

2:33 Why trimmest thou thy way to seek love? therefore hast thou also
taught the wicked ones thy ways.

2:34 Also in thy skirts is found the blood of the souls of the poor
innocents: I have not found it by secret search, but upon all these.

2:35 Yet thou sayest, Because I am innocent, surely his anger shall
turn from me. Behold, I will plead with thee, because thou sayest, I
have not sinned.

2:36 Why gaddest thou about so much to change thy way? thou also shalt
be ashamed of Egypt, as thou wast ashamed of Assyria.

2:37 Yea, thou shalt go forth from him, and thine hands upon thine
head: for the LORD hath rejected thy confidences, and thou shalt not
prosper in them.

3:1 They say, If a man put away his wife, and she go from him, and
become another man's, shall he return unto her again? shall not that
land be greatly polluted? but thou hast played the harlot with many
lovers; yet return again to me, saith the LORD.

3:2 Lift up thine eyes unto the high places, and see where thou hast
not been lien with. In the ways hast thou sat for them, as the Arabian
in the wilderness; and thou hast polluted the land with thy whoredoms
and with thy wickedness.

3:3 Therefore the showers have been withholden, and there hath been no
latter rain; and thou hadst a whore's forehead, thou refusedst to be
ashamed.

3:4 Wilt thou not from this time cry unto me, My father, thou art the
guide of my youth?  3:5 Will he reserve his anger for ever? will he
keep it to the end?  Behold, thou hast spoken and done evil things as
thou couldest.

3:6 The LORD said also unto me in the days of Josiah the king, Hast
thou seen that which backsliding Israel hath done? she is gone up upon
every high mountain and under every green tree, and there hath played
the harlot.

3:7 And I said after she had done all these things, Turn thou unto me.
But she returned not. And her treacherous sister Judah saw it.

3:8 And I saw, when for all the causes whereby backsliding Israel
committed adultery I had put her away, and given her a bill of
divorce; yet her treacherous sister Judah feared not, but went and
played the harlot also.

3:9 And it came to pass through the lightness of her whoredom, that
she defiled the land, and committed adultery with stones and with
stocks.

3:10 And yet for all this her treacherous sister Judah hath not turned
unto me with her whole heart, but feignedly, saith the LORD.

3:11 And the LORD said unto me, The backsliding Israel hath justified
herself more than treacherous Judah.

3:12 Go and proclaim these words toward the north, and say, Return,
thou backsliding Israel, saith the LORD; and I will not cause mine
anger to fall upon you: for I am merciful, saith the LORD, and I will
not keep anger for ever.

3:13 Only acknowledge thine iniquity, that thou hast transgressed
against the LORD thy God, and hast scattered thy ways to the strangers
under every green tree, and ye have not obeyed my voice, saith the
LORD.

3:14 Turn, O backsliding children, saith the LORD; for I am married
unto you: and I will take you one of a city, and two of a family, and
I will bring you to Zion: 3:15 And I will give you pastors according
to mine heart, which shall feed you with knowledge and understanding.

3:16 And it shall come to pass, when ye be multiplied and increased in
the land, in those days, saith the LORD, they shall say no more, The
ark of the covenant of the LORD: neither shall it come to mind:
neither shall they remember it; neither shall they visit it; neither
shall that be done any more.

3:17 At that time they shall call Jerusalem the throne of the LORD;
and all the nations shall be gathered unto it, to the name of the
LORD, to Jerusalem: neither shall they walk any more after the
imagination of their evil heart.

3:18 In those days the house of Judah shall walk with the house of
Israel, and they shall come together out of the land of the north to
the land that I have given for an inheritance unto your fathers.

3:19 But I said, How shall I put thee among the children, and give
thee a pleasant land, a goodly heritage of the hosts of nations? and I
said, Thou shalt call me, My father; and shalt not turn away from me.

3:20 Surely as a wife treacherously departeth from her husband, so
have ye dealt treacherously with me, O house of Israel, saith the
LORD.

3:21 A voice was heard upon the high places, weeping and supplications
of the children of Israel: for they have perverted their way, and they
have forgotten the LORD their God.

3:22 Return, ye backsliding children, and I will heal your
backslidings.

Behold, we come unto thee; for thou art the LORD our God.

3:23 Truly in vain is salvation hoped for from the hills, and from the
multitude of mountains: truly in the LORD our God is the salvation of
Israel.

3:24 For shame hath devoured the labour of our fathers from our youth;
their flocks and their herds, their sons and their daughters.

3:25 We lie down in our shame, and our confusion covereth us: for we
have sinned against the LORD our God, we and our fathers, from our
youth even unto this day, and have not obeyed the voice of the LORD
our God.

4:1 If thou wilt return, O Israel, saith the LORD, return unto me: and
if thou wilt put away thine abominations out of my sight, then shalt
thou not remove.

4:2 And thou shalt swear, The LORD liveth, in truth, in judgment, and
in righteousness; and the nations shall bless themselves in him, and
in him shall they glory.

4:3 For thus saith the LORD to the men of Judah and Jerusalem, Break
up your fallow ground, and sow not among thorns.

4:4 Circumcise yourselves to the LORD, and take away the foreskins of
your heart, ye men of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem: lest my fury
come forth like fire, and burn that none can quench it, because of the
evil of your doings.

4:5 Declare ye in Judah, and publish in Jerusalem; and say, Blow ye
the trumpet in the land: cry, gather together, and say, Assemble
yourselves, and let us go into the defenced cities.

4:6 Set up the standard toward Zion: retire, stay not: for I will
bring evil from the north, and a great destruction.

4:7 The lion is come up from his thicket, and the destroyer of the
Gentiles is on his way; he is gone forth from his place to make thy
land desolate; and thy cities shall be laid waste, without an
inhabitant.

4:8 For this gird you with sackcloth, lament and howl: for the fierce
anger of the LORD is not turned back from us.

4:9 And it shall come to pass at that day, saith the LORD, that the
heart of the king shall perish, and the heart of the princes; and the
priests shall be astonished, and the prophets shall wonder.

4:10 Then said I, Ah, Lord GOD! surely thou hast greatly deceived this
people and Jerusalem, saying, Ye shall have peace; whereas the sword
reacheth unto the soul.

4:11 At that time shall it be said to this people and to Jerusalem, A
dry wind of the high places in the wilderness toward the daughter of
my people, not to fan, nor to cleanse, 4:12 Even a full wind from
those places shall come unto me: now also will I give sentence against
them.

4:13 Behold, he shall come up as clouds, and his chariots shall be as
a whirlwind: his horses are swifter than eagles. Woe unto us! for we
are spoiled.

4:14 O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou mayest
be saved. How long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee?  4:15
For a voice declareth from Dan, and publisheth affliction from mount
Ephraim.

4:16 Make ye mention to the nations; behold, publish against
Jerusalem, that watchers come from a far country, and give out their
voice against the cities of Judah.

4:17 As keepers of a field, are they against her round about; because
she hath been rebellious against me, saith the LORD.

4:18 Thy way and thy doings have procured these things unto thee; this
is thy wickedness, because it is bitter, because it reacheth unto
thine heart.

4:19 My bowels, my bowels! I am pained at my very heart; my heart
maketh a noise in me; I cannot hold my peace, because thou hast heard,
O my soul, the sound of the trumpet, the alarm of war.

4:20 Destruction upon destruction is cried; for the whole land is
spoiled: suddenly are my tents spoiled, and my curtains in a moment.

4:21 How long shall I see the standard, and hear the sound of the
trumpet?  4:22 For my people is foolish, they have not known me; they
are sottish children, and they have none understanding: they are wise
to do evil, but to do good they have no knowledge.

4:23 I beheld the earth, and, lo, it was without form, and void; and
the heavens, and they had no light.

4:24 I beheld the mountains, and, lo, they trembled, and all the hills
moved lightly.

4:25 I beheld, and, lo, there was no man, and all the birds of the
heavens were fled.

4:26 I beheld, and, lo, the fruitful place was a wilderness, and all
the cities thereof were broken down at the presence of the LORD, and
by his fierce anger.

4:27 For thus hath the LORD said, The whole land shall be desolate;
yet will I not make a full end.

4:28 For this shall the earth mourn, and the heavens above be black;
because I have spoken it, I have purposed it, and will not repent,
neither will I turn back from it.

4:29 The whole city shall flee for the noise of the horsemen and
bowmen; they shall go into thickets, and climb up upon the rocks:
every city shall be forsaken, and not a man dwell therein.

4:30 And when thou art spoiled, what wilt thou do? Though thou
clothest thyself with crimson, though thou deckest thee with ornaments
of gold, though thou rentest thy face with painting, in vain shalt
thou make thyself fair; thy lovers will despise thee, they will seek
thy life.

4:31 For I have heard a voice as of a woman in travail, and the
anguish as of her that bringeth forth her first child, the voice of
the daughter of Zion, that bewaileth herself, that spreadeth her
hands, saying, Woe is me now! for my soul is wearied because of
murderers.

5:1 Run ye to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, and see now,
and know, and seek in the broad places thereof, if ye can find a man,
if there be any that executeth judgment, that seeketh the truth; and I
will pardon it.

5:2 And though they say, The LORD liveth; surely they swear falsely.

5:3 O LORD, are not thine eyes upon the truth? thou hast stricken
them, but they have not grieved; thou hast consumed them, but they
have refused to receive correction: they have made their faces harder
than a rock; they have refused to return.

5:4 Therefore I said, Surely these are poor; they are foolish: for
they know not the way of the LORD, nor the judgment of their God.

5:5 I will get me unto the great men, and will speak unto them; for
they have known the way of the LORD, and the judgment of their God:
but these have altogether broken the yoke, and burst the bonds.

5:6 Wherefore a lion out of the forest shall slay them, and a wolf of
the evenings shall spoil them, a leopard shall watch over their
cities: every one that goeth out thence shall be torn in pieces:
because their transgressions are many, and their backslidings are
increased.

5:7 How shall I pardon thee for this? thy children have forsaken me,
and sworn by them that are no gods: when I had fed them to the full,
they then committed adultery, and assembled themselves by troops in
the harlots' houses.

5:8 They were as fed horses in the morning: every one neighed after
his neighbour's wife.

5:9 Shall I not visit for these things? saith the LORD: and shall not
my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?  5:10 Go ye up upon her
walls, and destroy; but make not a full end: take away her
battlements; for they are not the LORD's.

5:11 For the house of Israel and the house of Judah have dealt very
treacherously against me, saith the LORD.

5:12 They have belied the LORD, and said, It is not he; neither shall
evil come upon us; neither shall we see sword nor famine: 5:13 And the
prophets shall become wind, and the word is not in them: thus shall it
be done unto them.

5:14 Wherefore thus saith the LORD God of hosts, Because ye speak this
word, behold, I will make my words in thy mouth fire, and this people
wood, and it shall devour them.

5:15 Lo, I will bring a nation upon you from far, O house of Israel,
saith the LORD: it is a mighty nation, it is an ancient nation, a
nation whose language thou knowest not, neither understandest what
they say.

5:16 Their quiver is as an open sepulchre, they are all mighty men.

5:17 And they shall eat up thine harvest, and thy bread, which thy
sons and thy daughters should eat: they shall eat up thy flocks and
thine herds: they shall eat up thy vines and thy fig trees: they shall
impoverish thy fenced cities, wherein thou trustedst, with the sword.

5:18 Nevertheless in those days, saith the LORD, I will not make a
full end with you.

5:19 And it shall come to pass, when ye shall say, Wherefore doeth the
LORD our God all these things unto us? then shalt thou answer them,
Like as ye have forsaken me, and served strange gods in your land, so
shall ye serve strangers in a land that is not your's.

5:20 Declare this in the house of Jacob, and publish it in Judah,
saying, 5:21 Hear now this, O foolish people, and without
understanding; which have eyes, and see not; which have ears, and hear
not: 5:22 Fear ye not me? saith the LORD: will ye not tremble at my
presence, which have placed the sand for the bound of the sea by a
perpetual decree, that it cannot pass it: and though the waves thereof
toss themselves, yet can they not prevail; though they roar, yet can
they not pass over it?  5:23 But this people hath a revolting and a
rebellious heart; they are revolted and gone.

5:24 Neither say they in their heart, Let us now fear the LORD our
God, that giveth rain, both the former and the latter, in his season:
he reserveth unto us the appointed weeks of the harvest.

5:25 Your iniquities have turned away these things, and your sins have
withholden good things from you.

5:26 For among my people are found wicked men: they lay wait, as he
that setteth snares; they set a trap, they catch men.

5:27 As a cage is full of birds, so are their houses full of deceit:
therefore they are become great, and waxen rich.

5:28 They are waxen fat, they shine: yea, they overpass the deeds of
the wicked: they judge not the cause, the cause of the fatherless, yet
they prosper; and the right of the needy do they not judge.

5:29 Shall I not visit for these things? saith the LORD: shall not my
soul be avenged on such a nation as this?  5:30 A wonderful and
horrible thing is committed in the land; 5:31 The prophets prophesy
falsely, and the priests bear rule by their means; and my people love
to have it so: and what will ye do in the end thereof?  6:1 O ye
children of Benjamin, gather yourselves to flee out of the midst of
Jerusalem, and blow the trumpet in Tekoa, and set up a sign of fire in
Bethhaccerem: for evil appeareth out of the north, and great
destruction.

6:2 I have likened the daughter of Zion to a comely and delicate
woman.

6:3 The shepherds with their flocks shall come unto her; they shall
pitch their tents against her round about; they shall feed every one
in his place.

6:4 Prepare ye war against her; arise, and let us go up at noon. Woe
unto us! for the day goeth away, for the shadows of the evening are
stretched out.

6:5 Arise, and let us go by night, and let us destroy her palaces.

6:6 For thus hath the LORD of hosts said, Hew ye down trees, and cast
a mount against Jerusalem: this is the city to be visited; she is
wholly oppression in the midst of her.

6:7 As a fountain casteth out her waters, so she casteth out her
wickedness: violence and spoil is heard in her; before me continually
is grief and wounds.

6:8 Be thou instructed, O Jerusalem, lest my soul depart from thee;
lest I make thee desolate, a land not inhabited.

6:9 Thus saith the LORD of hosts, They shall throughly glean the
remnant of Israel as a vine: turn back thine hand as a grapegatherer
into the baskets.

6:10 To whom shall I speak, and give warning, that they may hear?
behold, their ear is uncircumcised, and they cannot hearken: behold,
the word of the LORD is unto them a reproach; they have no delight in
it.

6:11 Therefore I am full of the fury of the LORD; I am weary with
holding in: I will pour it out upon the children abroad, and upon the
assembly of young men together: for even the husband with the wife
shall be taken, the aged with him that is full of days.

6:12 And their houses shall be turned unto others, with their fields
and wives together: for I will stretch out my hand upon the
inhabitants of the land, saith the LORD.

6:13 For from the least of them even unto the greatest of them every
one is given to covetousness; and from the prophet even unto the
priest every one dealeth falsely.

6:14 They have healed also the hurt of the daughter of my people
slightly, saying, Peace, peace; when there is no peace.

6:15 Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? nay, they
were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush: therefore they
shall fall among them that fall: at the time that I visit them they
shall be cast down, saith the LORD.

6:16 Thus saith the LORD, Stand ye in the ways, and see, and ask for
the old paths, where is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall
find rest for your souls. But they said, We will not walk therein.

6:17 Also I set watchmen over you, saying, Hearken to the sound of the
trumpet. But they said, We will not hearken.

6:18 Therefore hear, ye nations, and know, O congregation, what is
among them.

6:19 Hear, O earth: behold, I will bring evil upon this people, even
the fruit of their thoughts, because they have not hearkened unto my
words, nor to my law, but rejected it.

6:20 To what purpose cometh there to me incense from Sheba, and the
sweet cane from a far country? your burnt offerings are not
acceptable, nor your sacrifices sweet unto me.

6:21 Therefore thus saith the LORD, Behold, I will lay stumblingblocks
before this people, and the fathers and the sons together shall fall
upon them; the neighbour and his friend shall perish.

6:22 Thus saith the LORD, Behold, a people cometh from the north
country, and a great nation shall be raised from the sides of the
earth.

6:23 They shall lay hold on bow and spear; they are cruel, and have no
mercy; their voice roareth like the sea; and they ride upon horses,
set in array as men for war against thee, O daughter of Zion.

6:24 We have heard the fame thereof: our hands wax feeble: anguish
hath taken hold of us, and pain, as of a woman in travail.

6:25 Go not forth into the field, nor walk by the way; for the sword
of the enemy and fear is on every side.

6:26 O daughter of my people, gird thee with sackcloth, and wallow
thyself in ashes: make thee mourning, as for an only son, most bitter
lamentation: for the spoiler shall suddenly come upon us.

6:27 I have set thee for a tower and a fortress among my people, that
thou mayest know and try their way.

6:28 They are all grievous revolters, walking with slanders: they are
brass and iron; they are all corrupters.

6:29 The bellows are burned, the lead is consumed of the fire; the
founder melteth in vain: for the wicked are not plucked away.

6:30 Reprobate silver shall men call them, because the LORD hath
rejected them.

7:1 The word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD, saying, 7:2 Stand in
the gate of the LORD's house, and proclaim there this word, and say,
Hear the word of the LORD, all ye of Judah, that enter in at these
gates to worship the LORD.

7:3 Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, Amend your ways
and your doings, and I will cause you to dwell in this place.

7:4 Trust ye not in lying words, saying, The temple of the LORD, The
temple of the LORD, The temple of the LORD, are these.

7:5 For if ye throughly amend your ways and your doings; if ye
throughly execute judgment between a man and his neighbour; 7:6 If ye
oppress not the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, and shed not
innocent blood in this place, neither walk after other gods to your
hurt: 7:7 Then will I cause you to dwell in this place, in the land
that I gave to your fathers, for ever and ever.

7:8 Behold, ye trust in lying words, that cannot profit.

7:9 Will ye steal, murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely, and
burn incense unto Baal, and walk after other gods whom ye know not;
7:10 And come and stand before me in this house, which is called by my
name, and say, We are delivered to do all these abominations?  7:11 Is
this house, which is called by my name, become a den of robbers in
your eyes? Behold, even I have seen it, saith the LORD.

7:12 But go ye now unto my place which was in Shiloh, where I set my
name at the first, and see what I did to it for the wickedness of my
people Israel.

7:13 And now, because ye have done all these works, saith the LORD,
and I spake unto you, rising up early and speaking, but ye heard not;
and I called you, but ye answered not; 7:14 Therefore will I do unto
this house, which is called by my name, wherein ye trust, and unto the
place which I gave to you and to your fathers, as I have done to
Shiloh.

7:15 And I will cast you out of my sight, as I have cast out all your
brethren, even the whole seed of Ephraim.

7:16 Therefore pray not thou for this people, neither lift up cry nor
prayer for them, neither make intercession to me: for I will not hear
thee.

7:17 Seest thou not what they do in the cities of Judah and in the
streets of Jerusalem?  7:18 The children gather wood, and the fathers
kindle the fire, and the women knead their dough, to make cakes to the
queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto other gods, that
they may provoke me to anger.

7:19 Do they provoke me to anger? saith the LORD: do they not provoke
themselves to the confusion of their own faces?  7:20 Therefore thus
saith the Lord GOD; Behold, mine anger and my fury shall be poured out
upon this place, upon man, and upon beast, and upon the trees of the
field, and upon the fruit of the ground; and it shall burn, and shall
not be quenched.

7:21 Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Put your burnt
offerings unto your sacrifices, and eat flesh.

7:22 For I spake not unto your fathers, nor commanded them in the day
that I brought them out of the land of Egypt, concerning burnt
offerings or sacrifices: 7:23 But this thing commanded I them, saying,
Obey my voice, and I will be your God, and ye shall be my people: and
walk ye in all the ways that I have commanded you, that it may be well
unto you.

7:24 But they hearkened not, nor inclined their ear, but walked in the
counsels and in the imagination of their evil heart, and went
backward, and not forward.

7:25 Since the day that your fathers came forth out of the land of
Egypt unto this day I have even sent unto you all my servants the
prophets, daily rising up early and sending them: 7:26 Yet they
hearkened not unto me, nor inclined their ear, but hardened their
neck: they did worse than their fathers.

7:27 Therefore thou shalt speak all these words unto them; but they
will not hearken to thee: thou shalt also call unto them; but they
will not answer thee.

7:28 But thou shalt say unto them, This is a nation that obeyeth not
the voice of the LORD their God, nor receiveth correction: truth is
perished, and is cut off from their mouth.

7:29 Cut off thine hair, O Jerusalem, and cast it away, and take up a
lamentation on high places; for the LORD hath rejected and forsaken
the generation of his wrath.

7:30 For the children of Judah have done evil in my sight, saith the
LORD: they have set their abominations in the house which is called by
my name, to pollute it.

7:31 And they have built the high places of Tophet, which is in the
valley of the son of Hinnom, to burn their sons and their daughters in
the fire; which I commanded them not, neither came it into my heart.

7:32 Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that it shall
no more be called Tophet, nor the valley of the son of Hinnom, but the
valley of slaughter: for they shall bury in Tophet, till there be no
place.

7:33 And the carcases of this people shall be meat for the fowls of
the heaven, and for the beasts of the earth; and none shall fray them
away.

7:34 Then will I cause to cease from the cities of Judah, and from the
streets of Jerusalem, the voice of mirth, and the voice of gladness,
the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride: for the land
shall be desolate.

8:1 At that time, saith the LORD, they shall bring out the bones of
the kings of Judah, and the bones of his princes, and the bones of the
priests, and the bones of the prophets, and the bones of the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, out of their graves: 8:2 And they shall
spread them before the sun, and the moon, and all the host of heaven,
whom they have loved, and whom they have served, and after whom they
have walked, and whom they have sought, and whom they have worshipped:
they shall not be gathered, nor be buried; they shall be for dung upon
the face of the earth.

8:3 And death shall be chosen rather than life by all the residue of
them that remain of this evil family, which remain in all the places
whither I have driven them, saith the LORD of hosts.

8:4 Moreover thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the LORD; Shall they
fall, and not arise? shall he turn away, and not return?  8:5 Why then
is this people of Jerusalem slidden back by a perpetual backsliding?
they hold fast deceit, they refuse to return.

8:6 I hearkened and heard, but they spake not aright: no man repented
him of his wickedness, saying, What have I done? every one turned to
his course, as the horse rusheth into the battle.

8:7 Yea, the stork in the heaven knoweth her appointed times; and the
turtle and the crane and the swallow observe the time of their coming;
but my people know not the judgment of the LORD.

8:8 How do ye say, We are wise, and the law of the LORD is with us?
Lo, certainly in vain made he it; the pen of the scribes is in vain.

8:9 The wise men are ashamed, they are dismayed and taken: lo, they
have rejected the word of the LORD; and what wisdom is in them?  8:10
Therefore will I give their wives unto others, and their fields to
them that shall inherit them: for every one from the least even unto
the greatest is given to covetousness, from the prophet even unto the
priest every one dealeth falsely.

8:11 For they have healed the hurt of the daughter of my people
slightly, saying, Peace, peace; when there is no peace.

8:12 Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? nay, they
were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush: therefore shall
they fall among them that fall: in the time of their visitation they
shall be cast down, saith the LORD.

8:13 I will surely consume them, saith the LORD: there shall be no
grapes on the vine, nor figs on the fig tree, and the leaf shall fade;
and the things that I have given them shall pass away from them.

8:14 Why do we sit still? assemble yourselves, and let us enter into
the defenced cities, and let us be silent there: for the LORD our God
hath put us to silence, and given us water of gall to drink, because
we have sinned against the LORD.

8:15 We looked for peace, but no good came; and for a time of health,
and behold trouble!  8:16 The snorting of his horses was heard from
Dan: the whole land trembled at the sound of the neighing of his
strong ones; for they are come, and have devoured the land, and all
that is in it; the city, and those that dwell therein.

8:17 For, behold, I will send serpents, cockatrices, among you, which
will not be charmed, and they shall bite you, saith the LORD.

8:18 When I would comfort myself against sorrow, my heart is faint in
me.

8:19 Behold the voice of the cry of the daughter of my people because
of them that dwell in a far country: Is not the LORD in Zion? is not
her king in her? Why have they provoked me to anger with their graven
images, and with strange vanities?  8:20 The harvest is past, the
summer is ended, and we are not saved.

8:21 For the hurt of the daughter of my people am I hurt; I am black;
astonishment hath taken hold on me.

8:22 Is there no balm in Gilead; is there no physician there? why then
is not the health of the daughter of my people recovered?  9:1 Oh that
my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might
weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people!  9:2 Oh
that I had in the wilderness a lodging place of wayfaring men; that I
might leave my people, and go from them! for they be all adulterers,
an assembly of treacherous men.

9:3 And they bend their tongues like their bow for lies: but they are
not valiant for the truth upon the earth; for they proceed from evil
to evil, and they know not me, saith the LORD.

9:4 Take ye heed every one of his neighbour, and trust ye not in any
brother: for every brother will utterly supplant, and every neighbour
will walk with slanders.

9:5 And they will deceive every one his neighbour, and will not speak
the truth: they have taught their tongue to speak lies, and weary
themselves to commit iniquity.

9:6 Thine habitation is in the midst of deceit; through deceit they
refuse to know me, saith the LORD.

9:7 Therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts, Behold, I will melt them,
and try them; for how shall I do for the daughter of my people?  9:8
Their tongue is as an arrow shot out; it speaketh deceit: one speaketh
peaceably to his neighbour with his mouth, but in heart he layeth his
wait.

9:9 Shall I not visit them for these things? saith the LORD: shall not
my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?  9:10 For the mountains
will I take up a weeping and wailing, and for the habitations of the
wilderness a lamentation, because they are burned up, so that none can
pass through them; neither can men hear the voice of the cattle; both
the fowl of the heavens and the beast are fled; they are gone.

9:11 And I will make Jerusalem heaps, and a den of dragons; and I will
make the cities of Judah desolate, without an inhabitant.

9:12 Who is the wise man, that may understand this? and who is he to
whom the mouth of the LORD hath spoken, that he may declare it, for
what the land perisheth and is burned up like a wilderness, that none
passeth through?  9:13 And the LORD saith, Because they have forsaken
my law which I set before them, and have not obeyed my voice, neither
walked therein; 9:14 But have walked after the imagination of their
own heart, and after Baalim, which their fathers taught them: 9:15
Therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I
will feed them, even this people, with wormwood, and give them water
of gall to drink.

9:16 I will scatter them also among the heathen, whom neither they nor
their fathers have known: and I will send a sword after them, till I
have consumed them.

9:17 Thus saith the LORD of hosts, Consider ye, and call for the
mourning women, that they may come; and send for cunning women, that
they may come: 9:18 And let them make haste, and take up a wailing for
us, that our eyes may run down with tears, and our eyelids gush out
with waters.

9:19 For a voice of wailing is heard out of Zion, How are we spoiled!
we are greatly confounded, because we have forsaken the land, because
our dwellings have cast us out.

9:20 Yet hear the word of the LORD, O ye women, and let your ear
receive the word of his mouth, and teach your daughters wailing, and
every one her neighbour lamentation.

9:21 For death is come up into our windows, and is entered into our
palaces, to cut off the children from without, and the young men from
the streets.

9:22 Speak, Thus saith the LORD, Even the carcases of men shall fall
as dung upon the open field, and as the handful after the harvestman,
and none shall gather them.

9:23 Thus saith the LORD, Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom,
neither let the mighty man glory in his might, let not the rich man
glory in his riches: 9:24 But let him that glorieth glory in this,
that he understandeth and knoweth me, that I am the LORD which
exercise lovingkindness, judgment, and righteousness, in the earth:
for in these things I delight, saith the LORD.

9:25 Behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that I will punish all
them which are circumcised with the uncircumcised; 9:26 Egypt, and
Judah, and Edom, and the children of Ammon, and Moab, and all that are
in the utmost corners, that dwell in the wilderness: for all these
nations are uncircumcised, and all the house of Israel are
uncircumcised in the heart.

10:1 Hear ye the word which the LORD speaketh unto you, O house of
Israel: 10:2 Thus saith the LORD, Learn not the way of the heathen,
and be not dismayed at the signs of heaven; for the heathen are
dismayed at them.

10:3 For the customs of the people are vain: for one cutteth a tree
out of the forest, the work of the hands of the workman, with the axe.

10:4 They deck it with silver and with gold; they fasten it with nails
and with hammers, that it move not.

10:5 They are upright as the palm tree, but speak not: they must needs
be borne, because they cannot go. Be not afraid of them; for they
cannot do evil, neither also is it in them to do good.

10:6 Forasmuch as there is none like unto thee, O LORD; thou art
great, and thy name is great in might.

10:7 Who would not fear thee, O King of nations? for to thee doth it
appertain: forasmuch as among all the wise men of the nations, and in
all their kingdoms, there is none like unto thee.

10:8 But they are altogether brutish and foolish: the stock is a
doctrine of vanities.

10:9 Silver spread into plates is brought from Tarshish, and gold from
Uphaz, the work of the workman, and of the hands of the founder: blue
and purple is their clothing: they are all the work of cunning men.

10:10 But the LORD is the true God, he is the living God, and an
everlasting king: at his wrath the earth shall tremble, and the
nations shall not be able to abide his indignation.

10:11 Thus shall ye say unto them, The gods that have not made the
heavens and the earth, even they shall perish from the earth, and from
under these heavens.

10:12 He hath made the earth by his power, he hath established the
world by his wisdom, and hath stretched out the heavens by his
discretion.

10:13 When he uttereth his voice, there is a multitude of waters in
the heavens, and he causeth the vapours to ascend from the ends of the
earth; he maketh lightnings with rain, and bringeth forth the wind out
of his treasures.

10:14 Every man is brutish in his knowledge: every founder is
confounded by the graven image: for his molten image is falsehood, and
there is no breath in them.

10:15 They are vanity, and the work of errors: in the time of their
visitation they shall perish.

10:16 The portion of Jacob is not like them: for he is the former of
all things; and Israel is the rod of his inheritance: The LORD of
hosts is his name.

10:17 Gather up thy wares out of the land, O inhabitant of the
fortress.

10:18 For thus saith the LORD, Behold, I will sling out the
inhabitants of the land at this once, and will distress them, that
they may find it so.

10:19 Woe is me for my hurt! my wound is grievous; but I said, Truly
this is a grief, and I must bear it.

10:20 My tabernacle is spoiled, and all my cords are broken: my
children are gone forth of me, and they are not: there is none to
stretch forth my tent any more, and to set up my curtains.

10:21 For the pastors are become brutish, and have not sought the
LORD: therefore they shall not prosper, and all their flocks shall be
scattered.

10:22 Behold, the noise of the bruit is come, and a great commotion
out of the north country, to make the cities of Judah desolate, and a
den of dragons.

10:23 O LORD, I know that the way of man is not in himself: it is not
in man that walketh to direct his steps.

10:24 O LORD, correct me, but with judgment; not in thine anger, lest
thou bring me to nothing.

10:25 Pour out thy fury upon the heathen that know thee not, and upon
the families that call not on thy name: for they have eaten up Jacob,
and devoured him, and consumed him, and have made his habitation
desolate.

11:1 The word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD saying, 11:2 Hear ye
the words of this covenant, and speak unto the men of Judah, and to
the inhabitants of Jerusalem; 11:3 And say thou unto them, Thus saith
the LORD God of Israel; Cursed be the man that obeyeth not the words
of this covenant, 11:4 Which I commanded your fathers in the day that
I brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, from the iron furnace,
saying, Obey my voice, and do them, according to all which I command
you: so shall ye be my people, and I will be your God: 11:5 That I may
perform the oath which I have sworn unto your fathers, to give them a
land flowing with milk and honey, as it is this day. Then answered I,
and said, So be it, O LORD.

11:6 Then the LORD said unto me, Proclaim all these words in the
cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, saying, Hear ye the
words of this covenant, and do them.

11:7 For I earnestly protested unto your fathers in the day that I
brought them up out of the land of Egypt, even unto this day, rising
early and protesting, saying, Obey my voice.

11:8 Yet they obeyed not, nor inclined their ear, but walked every one
in the imagination of their evil heart: therefore I will bring upon
them all the words of this covenant, which I commanded them to do: but
they did them not.

11:9 And the LORD said unto me, A conspiracy is found among the men of
Judah, and among the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

11:10 They are turned back to the iniquities of their forefathers,
which refused to hear my words; and they went after other gods to
serve them: the house of Israel and the house of Judah have broken my
covenant which I made with their fathers.

11:11 Therefore thus saith the LORD, Behold, I will bring evil upon
them, which they shall not be able to escape; and though they shall
cry unto me, I will not hearken unto them.

11:12 Then shall the cities of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem go,
and cry unto the gods unto whom they offer incense: but they shall not
save them at all in the time of their trouble.

11:13 For according to the number of thy cities were thy gods, O
Judah; and according to the number of the streets of Jerusalem have ye
set up altars to that shameful thing, even altars to burn incense unto
Baal.

11:14 Therefore pray not thou for this people, neither lift up a cry
or prayer for them: for I will not hear them in the time that they cry
unto me for their trouble.

11:15 What hath my beloved to do in mine house, seeing she hath
wrought lewdness with many, and the holy flesh is passed from thee?
when thou doest evil, then thou rejoicest.

11:16 The LORD called thy name, A green olive tree, fair, and of
goodly fruit: with the noise of a great tumult he hath kindled fire
upon it, and the branches of it are broken.

11:17 For the LORD of hosts, that planted thee, hath pronounced evil
against thee, for the evil of the house of Israel and of the house of
Judah, which they have done against themselves to provoke me to anger
in offering incense unto Baal.

11:18 And the LORD hath given me knowledge of it, and I know it: then
thou shewedst me their doings.

11:19 But I was like a lamb or an ox that is brought to the slaughter;
and I knew not that they had devised devices against me, saying, Let
us destroy the tree with the fruit thereof, and let us cut him off
from the land of the living, that his name may be no more remembered.

11:20 But, O LORD of hosts, that judgest righteously, that triest the
reins and the heart, let me see thy vengeance on them: for unto thee
have I revealed my cause.

11:21 Therefore thus saith the LORD of the men of Anathoth, that seek
thy life, saying, Prophesy not in the name of the LORD, that thou die
not by our hand: 11:22 Therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts, Behold,
I will punish them: the young men shall die by the sword; their sons
and their daughters shall die by famine: 11:23 And there shall be no
remnant of them: for I will bring evil upon the men of Anathoth, even
the year of their visitation.

12:1 Righteous art thou, O LORD, when I plead with thee: yet let me
talk with thee of thy judgments: Wherefore doth the way of the wicked
prosper?  wherefore are all they happy that deal very treacherously?
12:2 Thou hast planted them, yea, they have taken root: they grow,
yea, they bring forth fruit: thou art near in their mouth, and far
from their reins.

12:3 But thou, O LORD, knowest me: thou hast seen me, and tried mine
heart toward thee: pull them out like sheep for the slaughter, and
prepare them for the day of slaughter.

12:4 How long shall the land mourn, and the herbs of every field
wither, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein? the beasts are
consumed, and the birds; because they said, He shall not see our last
end.

12:5 If thou hast run with the footmen, and they have wearied thee,
then how canst thou contend with horses? and if in the land of peace,
wherein thou trustedst, they wearied thee, then how wilt thou do in
the swelling of Jordan?  12:6 For even thy brethren, and the house of
thy father, even they have dealt treacherously with thee; yea, they
have called a multitude after thee: believe them not, though they
speak fair words unto thee.

12:7 I have forsaken mine house, I have left mine heritage; I have
given the dearly beloved of my soul into the hand of her enemies.

12:8 Mine heritage is unto me as a lion in the forest; it crieth out
against me: therefore have I hated it.

12:9 Mine heritage is unto me as a speckled bird, the birds round
about are against her; come ye, assemble all the beasts of the field,
come to devour.

12:10 Many pastors have destroyed my vineyard, they have trodden my
portion under foot, they have made my pleasant portion a desolate
wilderness.

12:11 They have made it desolate, and being desolate it mourneth unto
me; the whole land is made desolate, because no man layeth it to
heart.

12:12 The spoilers are come upon all high places through the
wilderness: for the sword of the LORD shall devour from the one end of
the land even to the other end of the land: no flesh shall have peace.

12:13 They have sown wheat, but shall reap thorns: they have put
themselves to pain, but shall not profit: and they shall be ashamed of
your revenues because of the fierce anger of the LORD.

12:14 Thus saith the LORD against all mine evil neighbours, that touch
the inheritance which I have caused my people Israel to inherit;
Behold, I will pluck them out of their land, and pluck out the house
of Judah from among them.

12:15 And it shall come to pass, after that I have plucked them out I
will return, and have compassion on them, and will bring them again,
every man to his heritage, and every man to his land.

12:16 And it shall come to pass, if they will diligently learn the
ways of my people, to swear by my name, The LORD liveth; as they
taught my people to swear by Baal; then shall they be built in the
midst of my people.

12:17 But if they will not obey, I will utterly pluck up and destroy
that nation, saith the LORD.

13:1 Thus saith the LORD unto me, Go and get thee a linen girdle, and
put it upon thy loins, and put it not in water.

13:2 So I got a girdle according to the word of the LORD, and put it
on my loins.

13:3 And the word of the LORD came unto me the second time, saying,
13:4 Take the girdle that thou hast got, which is upon thy loins, and
arise, go to Euphrates, and hide it there in a hole of the rock.

13:5 So I went, and hid it by Euphrates, as the LORD commanded me.

13:6 And it came to pass after many days, that the LORD said unto me,
Arise, go to Euphrates, and take the girdle from thence, which I
commanded thee to hide there.

13:7 Then I went to Euphrates, and digged, and took the girdle from
the place where I had hid it: and, behold, the girdle was marred, it
was profitable for nothing.

13:8 Then the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 13:9 Thus saith
the LORD, After this manner will I mar the pride of Judah, and the
great pride of Jerusalem.

13:10 This evil people, which refuse to hear my words, which walk in
the imagination of their heart, and walk after other gods, to serve
them, and to worship them, shall even be as this girdle, which is good
for nothing.

13:11 For as the girdle cleaveth to the loins of a man, so have I
caused to cleave unto me the whole house of Israel and the whole house
of Judah, saith the LORD; that they might be unto me for a people, and
for a name, and for a praise, and for a glory: but they would not
hear.

13:12 Therefore thou shalt speak unto them this word; Thus saith the
LORD God of Israel, Every bottle shall be filled with wine: and they
shall say unto thee, Do we not certainly know that every bottle shall
be filled with wine?  13:13 Then shalt thou say unto them, Thus saith
the LORD, Behold, I will fill all the inhabitants of this land, even
the kings that sit upon David's throne, and the priests, and the
prophets, and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, with drunkenness.

13:14 And I will dash them one against another, even the fathers and
the sons together, saith the LORD: I will not pity, nor spare, nor
have mercy, but destroy them.

13:15 Hear ye, and give ear; be not proud: for the LORD hath spoken.

13:16 Give glory to the LORD your God, before he cause darkness, and
before your feet stumble upon the dark mountains, and, while ye look
for light, he turn it into the shadow of death, and make it gross
darkness.

13:17 But if ye will not hear it, my soul shall weep in secret places
for your pride; and mine eye shall weep sore, and run down with tears,
because the LORD's flock is carried away captive.

13:18 Say unto the king and to the queen, Humble yourselves, sit down:
for your principalities shall come down, even the crown of your glory.

13:19 The cities of the south shall be shut up, and none shall open
them: Judah shall be carried away captive all of it, it shall be
wholly carried away captive.

13:20 Lift up your eyes, and behold them that come from the north:
where is the flock that was given thee, thy beautiful flock?  13:21
What wilt thou say when he shall punish thee? for thou hast taught
them to be captains, and as chief over thee: shall not sorrows take
thee, as a woman in travail?  13:22 And if thou say in thine heart,
Wherefore come these things upon me?  For the greatness of thine
iniquity are thy skirts discovered, and thy heels made bare.

13:23 Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the leopard his spots?
then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evil.

13:24 Therefore will I scatter them as the stubble that passeth away
by the wind of the wilderness.

13:25 This is thy lot, the portion of thy measures from me, saith the
LORD; because thou hast forgotten me, and trusted in falsehood.

13:26 Therefore will I discover thy skirts upon thy face, that thy
shame may appear.

13:27 I have seen thine adulteries, and thy neighings, the lewdness of
thy whoredom, and thine abominations on the hills in the fields. Woe
unto thee, O Jerusalem! wilt thou not be made clean? when shall it
once be?  14:1 The word of the LORD that came to Jeremiah concerning
the dearth.

14:2 Judah mourneth, and the gates thereof languish; they are black
unto the ground; and the cry of Jerusalem is gone up.

14:3 And their nobles have sent their little ones to the waters: they
came to the pits, and found no water; they returned with their vessels
empty; they were ashamed and confounded, and covered their heads.

14:4 Because the ground is chapt, for there was no rain in the earth,
the plowmen were ashamed, they covered their heads.

14:5 Yea, the hind also calved in the field, and forsook it, because
there was no grass.

14:6 And the wild asses did stand in the high places, they snuffed up
the wind like dragons; their eyes did fail, because there was no
grass.

14:7 O LORD, though our iniquities testify against us, do thou it for
thy name's sake: for our backslidings are many; we have sinned against
thee.

14:8 O the hope of Israel, the saviour thereof in time of trouble, why
shouldest thou be as a stranger in the land, and as a wayfaring man
that turneth aside to tarry for a night?  14:9 Why shouldest thou be
as a man astonied, as a mighty man that cannot save? yet thou, O LORD,
art in the midst of us, and we are called by thy name; leave us not.

14:10 Thus saith the LORD unto this people, Thus have they loved to
wander, they have not refrained their feet, therefore the LORD doth
not accept them; he will now remember their iniquity, and visit their
sins.

14:11 Then said the LORD unto me, Pray not for this people for their
good.

14:12 When they fast, I will not hear their cry; and when they offer
burnt offering and an oblation, I will not accept them: but I will
consume them by the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence.

14:13 Then said I, Ah, Lord GOD! behold, the prophets say unto them,
Ye shall not see the sword, neither shall ye have famine; but I will
give you assured peace in this place.

14:14 Then the LORD said unto me, The prophets prophesy lies in my
name: I sent them not, neither have I commanded them, neither spake
unto them: they prophesy unto you a false vision and divination, and a
thing of nought, and the deceit of their heart.

14:15 Therefore thus saith the LORD concerning the prophets that
prophesy in my name, and I sent them not, yet they say, Sword and
famine shall not be in this land; By sword and famine shall those
prophets be consumed.

14:16 And the people to whom they prophesy shall be cast out in the
streets of Jerusalem because of the famine and the sword; and they
shall have none to bury them, them, their wives, nor their sons, nor
their daughters: for I will pour their wickedness upon them.

14:17 Therefore thou shalt say this word unto them; Let mine eyes run
down with tears night and day, and let them not cease: for the virgin
daughter of my people is broken with a great breach, with a very
grievous blow.

14:18 If I go forth into the field, then behold the slain with the
sword!  and if I enter into the city, then behold them that are sick
with famine!  yea, both the prophet and the priest go about into a
land that they know not.

14:19 Hast thou utterly rejected Judah? hath thy soul lothed Zion? why
hast thou smitten us, and there is no healing for us? we looked for
peace, and there is no good; and for the time of healing, and behold
trouble!  14:20 We acknowledge, O LORD, our wickedness, and the
iniquity of our fathers: for we have sinned against thee.

14:21 Do not abhor us, for thy name's sake, do not disgrace the throne
of thy glory: remember, break not thy covenant with us.

14:22 Are there any among the vanities of the Gentiles that can cause
rain? or can the heavens give showers? art not thou he, O LORD our
God?  therefore we will wait upon thee: for thou hast made all these
things.

15:1 Then said the LORD unto me, Though Moses and Samuel stood before
me, yet my mind could not be toward this people: cast them out of my
sight, and let them go forth.

15:2 And it shall come to pass, if they say unto thee, Whither shall
we go forth? then thou shalt tell them, Thus saith the LORD; Such as
are for death, to death; and such as are for the sword, to the sword;
and such as are for the famine, to the famine; and such as are for the
captivity, to the captivity.

15:3 And I will appoint over them four kinds, saith the LORD: the
sword to slay, and the dogs to tear, and the fowls of the heaven, and
the beasts of the earth, to devour and destroy.

15:4 And I will cause them to be removed into all kingdoms of the
earth, because of Manasseh the son of Hezekiah king of Judah, for that
which he did in Jerusalem.

15:5 For who shall have pity upon thee, O Jerusalem? or who shall
bemoan thee? or who shall go aside to ask how thou doest?  15:6 Thou
hast forsaken me, saith the LORD, thou art gone backward: therefore
will I stretch out my hand against thee, and destroy thee; I am weary
with repenting.

15:7 And I will fan them with a fan in the gates of the land; I will
bereave them of children, I will destroy my people since they return
not from their ways.

15:8 Their widows are increased to me above the sand of the seas: I
have brought upon them against the mother of the young men a spoiler
at noonday: I have caused him to fall upon it suddenly, and terrors
upon the city.

15:9 She that hath borne seven languisheth: she hath given up the
ghost; her sun is gone down while it was yet day: she hath been
ashamed and confounded: and the residue of them will I deliver to the
sword before their enemies, saith the LORD.

15:10 Woe is me, my mother, that thou hast borne me a man of strife
and a man of contention to the whole earth! I have neither lent on
usury, nor men have lent to me on usury; yet every one of them doth
curse me.

15:11 The LORD said, Verily it shall be well with thy remnant; verily
I will cause the enemy to entreat thee well in the time of evil and in
the time of affliction.

15:12 Shall iron break the northern iron and the steel?  15:13 Thy
substance and thy treasures will I give to the spoil without price,
and that for all thy sins, even in all thy borders.

15:14 And I will make thee to pass with thine enemies into a land
which thou knowest not: for a fire is kindled in mine anger, which
shall burn upon you.

15:15 O LORD, thou knowest: remember me, and visit me, and revenge me
of my persecutors; take me not away in thy longsuffering: know that
for thy sake I have suffered rebuke.

15:16 Thy words were found, and I did eat them; and thy word was unto
me the joy and rejoicing of mine heart: for I am called by thy name, O
LORD God of hosts.

15:17 I sat not in the assembly of the mockers, nor rejoiced; I sat
alone because of thy hand: for thou hast filled me with indignation.

15:18 Why is my pain perpetual, and my wound incurable, which refuseth
to be healed? wilt thou be altogether unto me as a liar, and as waters
that fail?  15:19 Therefore thus saith the LORD, If thou return, then
will I bring thee again, and thou shalt stand before me: and if thou
take forth the precious from the vile, thou shalt be as my mouth: let
them return unto thee; but return not thou unto them.

15:20 And I will make thee unto this people a fenced brasen wall: and
they shall fight against thee, but they shall not prevail against
thee: for I am with thee to save thee and to deliver thee, saith the
LORD.

15:21 And I will deliver thee out of the hand of the wicked, and I
will redeem thee out of the hand of the terrible.

16:1 The word of the LORD came also unto me, saying, 16:2 Thou shalt
not take thee a wife, neither shalt thou have sons or daughters in
this place.

16:3 For thus saith the LORD concerning the sons and concerning the
daughters that are born in this place, and concerning their mothers
that bare them, and concerning their fathers that begat them in this
land; 16:4 They shall die of grievous deaths; they shall not be
lamented; neither shall they be buried; but they shall be as dung upon
the face of the earth: and they shall be consumed by the sword, and by
famine; and their carcases shall be meat for the fowls of heaven, and
for the beasts of the earth.

16:5 For thus saith the LORD, Enter not into the house of mourning,
neither go to lament nor bemoan them: for I have taken away my peace
from this people, saith the LORD, even lovingkindness and mercies.

16:6 Both the great and the small shall die in this land: they shall
not be buried, neither shall men lament for them, nor cut themselves,
nor make themselves bald for them: 16:7 Neither shall men tear
themselves for them in mourning, to comfort them for the dead; neither
shall men give them the cup of consolation to drink for their father
or for their mother.

16:8 Thou shalt not also go into the house of feasting, to sit with
them to eat and to drink.

16:9 For thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I
will cause to cease out of this place in your eyes, and in your days,
the voice of mirth, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the
bridegroom, and the voice of the bride.

16:10 And it shall come to pass, when thou shalt shew this people all
these words, and they shall say unto thee, Wherefore hath the LORD
pronounced all this great evil against us? or what is our iniquity? or
what is our sin that we have committed against the LORD our God?
16:11 Then shalt thou say unto them, Because your fathers have
forsaken me, saith the LORD, and have walked after other gods, and
have served them, and have worshipped them, and have forsaken me, and
have not kept my law; 16:12 And ye have done worse than your fathers;
for, behold, ye walk every one after the imagination of his evil
heart, that they may not hearken unto me: 16:13 Therefore will I cast
you out of this land into a land that ye know not, neither ye nor your
fathers; and there shall ye serve other gods day and night; where I
will not shew you favour.

16:14 Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that it shall
no more be said, The LORD liveth, that brought up the children of
Israel out of the land of Egypt; 16:15 But, The LORD liveth, that
brought up the children of Israel from the land of the north, and from
all the lands whither he had driven them: and I will bring them again
into their land that I gave unto their fathers.

16:16 Behold, I will send for many fishers, saith the LORD, and they
shall fish them; and after will I send for many hunters, and they
shall hunt them from every mountain, and from every hill, and out of
the holes of the rocks.

16:17 For mine eyes are upon all their ways: they are not hid from my
face, neither is their iniquity hid from mine eyes.

16:18 And first I will recompense their iniquity and their sin double;
because they have defiled my land, they have filled mine inheritance
with the carcases of their detestable and abominable things.

16:19 O LORD, my strength, and my fortress, and my refuge in the day
of affliction, the Gentiles shall come unto thee from the ends of the
earth, and shall say, Surely our fathers have inherited lies, vanity,
and things wherein there is no profit.

16:20 Shall a man make gods unto himself, and they are no gods?  16:21
Therefore, behold, I will this once cause them to know, I will cause
them to know mine hand and my might; and they shall know that my name
is The LORD.

17:1 The sin of Judah is written with a pen of iron, and with the
point of a diamond: it is graven upon the table of their heart, and
upon the horns of your altars; 17:2 Whilst their children remember
their altars and their groves by the green trees upon the high hills.

17:3 O my mountain in the field, I will give thy substance and all thy
treasures to the spoil, and thy high places for sin, throughout all
thy borders.

17:4 And thou, even thyself, shalt discontinue from thine heritage
that I gave thee; and I will cause thee to serve thine enemies in the
land which thou knowest not: for ye have kindled a fire in mine anger,
which shall burn for ever.

17:5 Thus saith the LORD; Cursed be the man that trusteth in man, and
maketh flesh his arm, and whose heart departeth from the LORD.

17:6 For he shall be like the heath in the desert, and shall not see
when good cometh; but shall inhabit the parched places in the
wilderness, in a salt land and not inhabited.

17:7 Blessed is the man that trusteth in the LORD, and whose hope the
LORD is.

17:8 For he shall be as a tree planted by the waters, and that
spreadeth out her roots by the river, and shall not see when heat
cometh, but her leaf shall be green; and shall not be careful in the
year of drought, neither shall cease from yielding fruit.

17:9 The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked:
who can know it?  17:10 I the LORD search the heart, I try the reins,
even to give every man according to his ways, and according to the
fruit of his doings.

17:11 As the partridge sitteth on eggs, and hatcheth them not; so he
that getteth riches, and not by right, shall leave them in the midst
of his days, and at his end shall be a fool.

17:12 A glorious high throne from the beginning is the place of our
sanctuary.

17:13 O LORD, the hope of Israel, all that forsake thee shall be
ashamed, and they that depart from me shall be written in the earth,
because they have forsaken the LORD, the fountain of living waters.

17:14 Heal me, O LORD, and I shall be healed; save me, and I shall be
saved: for thou art my praise.

17:15 Behold, they say unto me, Where is the word of the LORD? let it
come now.

17:16 As for me, I have not hastened from being a pastor to follow
thee: neither have I desired the woeful day; thou knowest: that which
came out of my lips was right before thee.

17:17 Be not a terror unto me: thou art my hope in the day of evil.

17:18 Let them be confounded that persecute me, but let not me be
confounded: let them be dismayed, but let not me be dismayed: bring
upon them the day of evil, and destroy them with double destruction.

17:19 Thus said the LORD unto me; Go and stand in the gate of the
children of the people, whereby the kings of Judah come in, and by the
which they go out, and in all the gates of Jerusalem; 17:20 And say
unto them, Hear ye the word of the LORD, ye kings of Judah, and all
Judah, and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, that enter in by these
gates: 17:21 Thus saith the LORD; Take heed to yourselves, and bear no
burden on the sabbath day, nor bring it in by the gates of Jerusalem;
17:22 Neither carry forth a burden out of your houses on the sabbath
day, neither do ye any work, but hallow ye the sabbath day, as I
commanded your fathers.

17:23 But they obeyed not, neither inclined their ear, but made their
neck stiff, that they might not hear, nor receive instruction.

17:24 And it shall come to pass, if ye diligently hearken unto me,
saith the LORD, to bring in no burden through the gates of this city
on the sabbath day, but hallow the sabbath day, to do no work therein;
17:25 Then shall there enter into the gates of this city kings and
princes sitting upon the throne of David, riding in chariots and on
horses, they, and their princes, the men of Judah, and the inhabitants
of Jerusalem: and this city shall remain for ever.

17:26 And they shall come from the cities of Judah, and from the
places about Jerusalem, and from the land of Benjamin, and from the
plain, and from the mountains, and from the south, bringing burnt
offerings, and sacrifices, and meat offerings, and incense, and
bringing sacrifices of praise, unto the house of the LORD.

17:27 But if ye will not hearken unto me to hallow the sabbath day,
and not to bear a burden, even entering in at the gates of Jerusalem
on the sabbath day; then will I kindle a fire in the gates thereof,
and it shall devour the palaces of Jerusalem, and it shall not be
quenched.

18:1 The word which came to Jeremiah from the LORD, saying, 18:2
Arise, and go down to the potter's house, and there I will cause thee
to hear my words.

18:3 Then I went down to the potter's house, and, behold, he wrought a
work on the wheels.

18:4 And the vessel that he made of clay was marred in the hand of the
potter: so he made it again another vessel, as seemed good to the
potter to make it.

18:5 Then the word of the LORD came to me, saying, 18:6 O house of
Israel, cannot I do with you as this potter? saith the LORD. Behold,
as the clay is in the potter's hand, so are ye in mine hand, O house
of Israel.

18:7 At what instant I shall speak concerning a nation, and concerning
a kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it; 18:8 If
that nation, against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, I
will repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them.

18:9 And at what instant I shall speak concerning a nation, and
concerning a kingdom, to build and to plant it; 18:10 If it do evil in
my sight, that it obey not my voice, then I will repent of the good,
wherewith I said I would benefit them.

18:11 Now therefore go to, speak to the men of Judah, and to the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying, Thus saith the LORD; Behold, I frame
evil against you, and devise a device against you: return ye now every
one from his evil way, and make your ways and your doings good.

18:12 And they said, There is no hope: but we will walk after our own
devices, and we will every one do the imagination of his evil heart.

18:13 Therefore thus saith the LORD; Ask ye now among the heathen, who
hath heard such things: the virgin of Israel hath done a very horrible
thing.

18:14 Will a man leave the snow of Lebanon which cometh from the rock
of the field? or shall the cold flowing waters that come from another
place be forsaken?  18:15 Because my people hath forgotten me, they
have burned incense to vanity, and they have caused them to stumble in
their ways from the ancient paths, to walk in paths, in a way not cast
up; 18:16 To make their land desolate, and a perpetual hissing; every
one that passeth thereby shall be astonished, and wag his head.

18:17 I will scatter them as with an east wind before the enemy; I
will shew them the back, and not the face, in the day of their
calamity.

18:18 Then said they, Come and let us devise devices against Jeremiah;
for the law shall not perish from the priest, nor counsel from the
wise, nor the word from the prophet. Come, and let us smite him with
the tongue, and let us not give heed to any of his words.

18:19 Give heed to me, O LORD, and hearken to the voice of them that
contend with me.

18:20 Shall evil be recompensed for good? for they have digged a pit
for my soul. Remember that I stood before thee to speak good for them,
and to turn away thy wrath from them.

18:21 Therefore deliver up their children to the famine, and pour out
their blood by the force of the sword; and let their wives be bereaved
of their children, and be widows; and let their men be put to death;
let their young men be slain by the sword in battle.

18:22 Let a cry be heard from their houses, when thou shalt bring a
troop suddenly upon them: for they have digged a pit to take me, and
hid snares for my feet.

18:23 Yet, LORD, thou knowest all their counsel against me to slay me:
forgive not their iniquity, neither blot out their sin from thy sight,
but let them be overthrown before thee; deal thus with them in the
time of thine anger.

19:1 Thus saith the LORD, Go and get a potter's earthen bottle, and
take of the ancients of the people, and of the ancients of the
priests; 19:2 And go forth unto the valley of the son of Hinnom, which
is by the entry of the east gate, and proclaim there the words that I
shall tell thee, 19:3 And say, Hear ye the word of the LORD, O kings
of Judah, and inhabitants of Jerusalem; Thus saith the LORD of hosts,
the God of Israel; Behold, I will bring evil upon this place, the
which whosoever heareth, his ears shall tingle.

19:4 Because they have forsaken me, and have estranged this place, and
have burned incense in it unto other gods, whom neither they nor their
fathers have known, nor the kings of Judah, and have filled this place
with the blood of innocents; 19:5 They have built also the high places
of Baal, to burn their sons with fire for burnt offerings unto Baal,
which I commanded not, nor spake it, neither came it into my mind:
19:6 Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that this place
shall no more be called Tophet, nor The valley of the son of Hinnom,
but The valley of slaughter.

19:7 And I will make void the counsel of Judah and Jerusalem in this
place; and I will cause them to fall by the sword before their
enemies, and by the hands of them that seek their lives: and their
carcases will I give to be meat for the fowls of the heaven, and for
the beasts of the earth.

19:8 And I will make this city desolate, and an hissing; every one
that passeth thereby shall be astonished and hiss because of all the
plagues thereof.

19:9 And I will cause them to eat the flesh of their sons and the
flesh of their daughters, and they shall eat every one the flesh of
his friend in the siege and straitness, wherewith their enemies, and
they that seek their lives, shall straiten them.

19:10 Then shalt thou break the bottle in the sight of the men that go
with thee, 19:11 And shalt say unto them, Thus saith the LORD of
hosts; Even so will I break this people and this city, as one breaketh
a potter's vessel, that cannot be made whole again: and they shall
bury them in Tophet, till there be no place to bury.

19:12 Thus will I do unto this place, saith the LORD, and to the
inhabitants thereof, and even make this city as Tophet: 19:13 And the
houses of Jerusalem, and the houses of the kings of Judah, shall be
defiled as the place of Tophet, because of all the houses upon whose
roofs they have burned incense unto all the host of heaven, and have
poured out drink offerings unto other gods.

19:14 Then came Jeremiah from Tophet, whither the LORD had sent him to
prophesy; and he stood in the court of the LORD's house; and said to
all the people, 19:15 Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel;
Behold, I will bring upon this city and upon all her towns all the
evil that I have pronounced against it, because they have hardened
their necks, that they might not hear my words.

20:1 Now Pashur the son of Immer the priest, who was also chief
governor in the house of the LORD, heard that Jeremiah prophesied
these things.

20:2 Then Pashur smote Jeremiah the prophet, and put him in the stocks
that were in the high gate of Benjamin, which was by the house of the
LORD.

20:3 And it came to pass on the morrow, that Pashur brought forth
Jeremiah out of the stocks. Then said Jeremiah unto him, The LORD hath
not called thy name Pashur, but Magormissabib.

20:4 For thus saith the LORD, Behold, I will make thee a terror to
thyself, and to all thy friends: and they shall fall by the sword of
their enemies, and thine eyes shall behold it: and I will give all
Judah into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall carry them
captive into Babylon, and shall slay them with the sword.

20:5 Moreover I will deliver all the strength of this city, and all
the labours thereof, and all the precious things thereof, and all the
treasures of the kings of Judah will I give into the hand of their
enemies, which shall spoil them, and take them, and carry them to
Babylon.

20:6 And thou, Pashur, and all that dwell in thine house shall go into
captivity: and thou shalt come to Babylon, and there thou shalt die,
and shalt be buried there, thou, and all thy friends, to whom thou
hast prophesied lies.

20:7 O LORD, thou hast deceived me, and I was deceived; thou art
stronger than I, and hast prevailed: I am in derision daily, every one
mocketh me.

20:8 For since I spake, I cried out, I cried violence and spoil;
because the word of the LORD was made a reproach unto me, and a
derision, daily.

20:9 Then I said, I will not make mention of him, nor speak any more
in his name. But his word was in mine heart as a burning fire shut up
in my bones, and I was weary with forbearing, and I could not stay.

20:10 For I heard the defaming of many, fear on every side. Report,
say they, and we will report it. All my familiars watched for my
halting, saying, Peradventure he will be enticed, and we shall prevail
against him, and we shall take our revenge on him.

20:11 But the LORD is with me as a mighty terrible one: therefore my
persecutors shall stumble, and they shall not prevail: they shall be
greatly ashamed; for they shall not prosper: their everlasting
confusion shall never be forgotten.

20:12 But, O LORD of hosts, that triest the righteous, and seest the
reins and the heart, let me see thy vengeance on them: for unto thee
have I opened my cause.

20:13 Sing unto the LORD, praise ye the LORD: for he hath delivered
the soul of the poor from the hand of evildoers.

20:14 Cursed be the day wherein I was born: let not the day wherein my
mother bare me be blessed.

20:15 Cursed be the man who brought tidings to my father, saying, A
man child is born unto thee; making him very glad.

20:16 And let that man be as the cities which the LORD overthrew, and
repented not: and let him hear the cry in the morning, and the
shouting at noontide; 20:17 Because he slew me not from the womb; or
that my mother might have been my grave, and her womb to be always
great with me.

20:18 Wherefore came I forth out of the womb to see labour and sorrow,
that my days should be consumed with shame?  21:1 The word which came
unto Jeremiah from the LORD, when king Zedekiah sent unto him Pashur
the son of Melchiah, and Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah the priest,
saying, 21:2 Enquire, I pray thee, of the LORD for us; for
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon maketh war against us; if so be that
the LORD will deal with us according to all his wondrous works, that
he may go up from us.

21:3 Then said Jeremiah unto them, Thus shall ye say to Zedekiah: 21:4
Thus saith the LORD God of Israel; Behold, I will turn back the
weapons of war that are in your hands, wherewith ye fight against the
king of Babylon, and against the Chaldeans, which besiege you without
the walls, and I will assemble them into the midst of this city.

21:5 And I myself will fight against you with an outstretched hand and
with a strong arm, even in anger, and in fury, and in great wrath.

21:6 And I will smite the inhabitants of this city, both man and
beast: they shall die of a great pestilence.

21:7 And afterward, saith the LORD, I will deliver Zedekiah king of
Judah, and his servants, and the people, and such as are left in this
city from the pestilence, from the sword, and from the famine, into
the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and into the hand of their
enemies, and into the hand of those that seek their life: and he shall
smite them with the edge of the sword; he shall not spare them,
neither have pity, nor have mercy.

21:8 And unto this people thou shalt say, Thus saith the LORD; Behold,
I set before you the way of life, and the way of death.

21:9 He that abideth in this city shall die by the sword, and by the
famine, and by the pestilence: but he that goeth out, and falleth to
the Chaldeans that besiege you, he shall live, and his life shall be
unto him for a prey.

21:10 For I have set my face against this city for evil, and not for
good, saith the LORD: it shall be given into the hand of the king of
Babylon, and he shall burn it with fire.

21:11 And touching the house of the king of Judah, say, Hear ye the
word of the LORD; 21:12 O house of David, thus saith the LORD; Execute
judgment in the morning, and deliver him that is spoiled out of the
hand of the oppressor, lest my fury go out like fire, and burn that
none can quench it, because of the evil of your doings.

21:13 Behold, I am against thee, O inhabitant of the valley, and rock
of the plain, saith the LORD; which say, Who shall come down against
us? or who shall enter into our habitations?  21:14 But I will punish
you according to the fruit of your doings, saith the LORD: and I will
kindle a fire in the forest thereof, and it shall devour all things
round about it.

22:1 Thus saith the LORD; Go down to the house of the king of Judah,
and speak there this word, 22:2 And say, Hear the word of the LORD, O
king of Judah, that sittest upon the throne of David, thou, and thy
servants, and thy people that enter in by these gates: 22:3 Thus saith
the LORD; Execute ye judgment and righteousness, and deliver the
spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor: and do no wrong, do no
violence to the stranger, the fatherless, nor the widow, neither shed
innocent blood in this place.

22:4 For if ye do this thing indeed, then shall there enter in by the
gates of this house kings sitting upon the throne of David, riding in
chariots and on horses, he, and his servants, and his people.

22:5 But if ye will not hear these words, I swear by myself, saith the
LORD, that this house shall become a desolation.

22:6 For thus saith the LORD unto the king's house of Judah; Thou art
Gilead unto me, and the head of Lebanon: yet surely I will make thee a
wilderness, and cities which are not inhabited.

22:7 And I will prepare destroyers against thee, every one with his
weapons: and they shall cut down thy choice cedars, and cast them into
the fire.

22:8 And many nations shall pass by this city, and they shall say
every man to his neighbour, Wherefore hath the LORD done thus unto
this great city?  22:9 Then they shall answer, Because they have
forsaken the covenant of the LORD their God, and worshipped other
gods, and served them.

22:10 Weep ye not for the dead, neither bemoan him: but weep sore for
him that goeth away: for he shall return no more, nor see his native
country.

22:11 For thus saith the LORD touching Shallum the son of Josiah king
of Judah, which reigned instead of Josiah his father, which went forth
out of this place; He shall not return thither any more: 22:12 But he
shall die in the place whither they have led him captive, and shall
see this land no more.

22:13 Woe unto him that buildeth his house by unrighteousness, and his
chambers by wrong; that useth his neighbour's service without wages,
and giveth him not for his work; 22:14 That saith, I will build me a
wide house and large chambers, and cutteth him out windows; and it is
cieled with cedar, and painted with vermilion.

22:15 Shalt thou reign, because thou closest thyself in cedar? did not
thy father eat and drink, and do judgment and justice, and then it was
well with him?  22:16 He judged the cause of the poor and needy; then
it was well with him: was not this to know me? saith the LORD.

22:17 But thine eyes and thine heart are not but for thy covetousness,
and for to shed innocent blood, and for oppression, and for violence,
to do it.

22:18 Therefore thus saith the LORD concerning Jehoiakim the son of
Josiah king of Judah; They shall not lament for him, saying, Ah my
brother! or, Ah sister! they shall not lament for him, saying, Ah
lord! or, Ah his glory!  22:19 He shall be buried with the burial of
an ass, drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem.

22:20 Go up to Lebanon, and cry; and lift up thy voice in Bashan, and
cry from the passages: for all thy lovers are destroyed.

22:21 I spake unto thee in thy prosperity; but thou saidst, I will not
hear. This hath been thy manner from thy youth, that thou obeyedst not
my voice.

22:22 The wind shall eat up all thy pastors, and thy lovers shall go
into captivity: surely then shalt thou be ashamed and confounded for
all thy wickedness.

22:23 O inhabitant of Lebanon, that makest thy nest in the cedars, how
gracious shalt thou be when pangs come upon thee, the pain as of a
woman in travail!  22:24 As I live, saith the LORD, though Coniah the
son of Jehoiakim king of Judah were the signet upon my right hand, yet
would I pluck thee thence; 22:25 And I will give thee into the hand of
them that seek thy life, and into the hand of them whose face thou
fearest, even into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and
into the hand of the Chaldeans.

22:26 And I will cast thee out, and thy mother that bare thee, into
another country, where ye were not born; and there shall ye die.

22:27 But to the land whereunto they desire to return, thither shall
they not return.

22:28 Is this man Coniah a despised broken idol? is he a vessel
wherein is no pleasure? wherefore are they cast out, he and his seed,
and are cast into a land which they know not?  22:29 O earth, earth,
earth, hear the word of the LORD.

22:30 Thus saith the LORD, Write ye this man childless, a man that
shall not prosper in his days: for no man of his seed shall prosper,
sitting upon the throne of David, and ruling any more in Judah.

23:1 Woe be unto the pastors that destroy and scatter the sheep of my
pasture! saith the LORD.

23:2 Therefore thus saith the LORD God of Israel against the pastors
that feed my people; Ye have scattered my flock, and driven them away,
and have not visited them: behold, I will visit upon you the evil of
your doings, saith the LORD.

23:3 And I will gather the remnant of my flock out of all countries
whither I have driven them, and will bring them again to their folds;
and they shall be fruitful and increase.

23:4 And I will set up shepherds over them which shall feed them: and
they shall fear no more, nor be dismayed, neither shall they be
lacking, saith the LORD.

23:5 Behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that I will raise unto
David a righteous Branch, and a King shall reign and prosper, and
shall execute judgment and justice in the earth.

23:6 In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely:
and this is his name whereby he shall be called, THE LORD OUR
RIGHTEOUSNESS.

23:7 Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that they shall
no more say, The LORD liveth, which brought up the children of Israel
out of the land of Egypt; 23:8 But, The LORD liveth, which brought up
and which led the seed of the house of Israel out of the north
country, and from all countries whither I had driven them; and they
shall dwell in their own land.

23:9 Mine heart within me is broken because of the prophets; all my
bones shake; I am like a drunken man, and like a man whom wine hath
overcome, because of the LORD, and because of the words of his
holiness.

23:10 For the land is full of adulterers; for because of swearing the
land mourneth; the pleasant places of the wilderness are dried up, and
their course is evil, and their force is not right.

23:11 For both prophet and priest are profane; yea, in my house have I
found their wickedness, saith the LORD.

23:12 Wherefore their way shall be unto them as slippery ways in the
darkness: they shall be driven on, and fall therein: for I will bring
evil upon them, even the year of their visitation, saith the LORD.

23:13 And I have seen folly in the prophets of Samaria; they
prophesied in Baal, and caused my people Israel to err.

23:14 I have seen also in the prophets of Jerusalem an horrible thing:
they commit adultery, and walk in lies: they strengthen also the hands
of evildoers, that none doth return from his wickedness; they are all
of them unto me as Sodom, and the inhabitants thereof as Gomorrah.

23:15 Therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts concerning the prophets;
Behold, I will feed them with wormwood, and make them drink the water
of gall: for from the prophets of Jerusalem is profaneness gone forth
into all the land.

23:16 Thus saith the LORD of hosts, Hearken not unto the words of the
prophets that prophesy unto you: they make you vain: they speak a
vision of their own heart, and not out of the mouth of the LORD.

23:17 They say still unto them that despise me, The LORD hath said, Ye
shall have peace; and they say unto every one that walketh after the
imagination of his own heart, No evil shall come upon you.

23:18 For who hath stood in the counsel of the LORD, and hath
perceived and heard his word? who hath marked his word, and heard it?
23:19 Behold, a whirlwind of the LORD is gone forth in fury, even a
grievous whirlwind: it shall fall grievously upon the head of the
wicked.

23:20 The anger of the LORD shall not return, until he have executed,
and till he have performed the thoughts of his heart: in the latter
days ye shall consider it perfectly.

23:21 I have not sent these prophets, yet they ran: I have not spoken
to them, yet they prophesied.

23:22 But if they had stood in my counsel, and had caused my people to
hear my words, then they should have turned them from their evil way,
and from the evil of their doings.

23:23 Am I a God at hand, saith the LORD, and not a God afar off?
23:24 Can any hide himself in secret places that I shall not see him?
saith the LORD. Do not I fill heaven and earth? saith the LORD.

23:25 I have heard what the prophets said, that prophesy lies in my
name, saying, I have dreamed, I have dreamed.

23:26 How long shall this be in the heart of the prophets that
prophesy lies? yea, they are prophets of the deceit of their own
heart; 23:27 Which think to cause my people to forget my name by their
dreams which they tell every man to his neighbour, as their fathers
have forgotten my name for Baal.

23:28 The prophet that hath a dream, let him tell a dream; and he that
hath my word, let him speak my word faithfully. What is the chaff to
the wheat? saith the LORD.

23:29 Is not my word like as a fire? saith the LORD; and like a hammer
that breaketh the rock in pieces?  23:30 Therefore, behold, I am
against the prophets, saith the LORD, that steal my words every one
from his neighbour.

23:31 Behold, I am against the prophets, saith the LORD, that use
their tongues, and say, He saith.

23:32 Behold, I am against them that prophesy false dreams, saith the
LORD, and do tell them, and cause my people to err by their lies, and
by their lightness; yet I sent them not, nor commanded them: therefore
they shall not profit this people at all, saith the LORD.

23:33 And when this people, or the prophet, or a priest, shall ask
thee, saying, What is the burden of the LORD? thou shalt then say unto
them, What burden? I will even forsake you, saith the LORD.

23:34 And as for the prophet, and the priest, and the people, that
shall say, The burden of the LORD, I will even punish that man and his
house.

23:35 Thus shall ye say every one to his neighbour, and every one to
his brother, What hath the LORD answered? and, What hath the LORD
spoken?  23:36 And the burden of the LORD shall ye mention no more:
for every man's word shall be his burden; for ye have perverted the
words of the living God, of the LORD of hosts our God.

23:37 Thus shalt thou say to the prophet, What hath the LORD answered
thee? and, What hath the LORD spoken?  23:38 But since ye say, The
burden of the LORD; therefore thus saith the LORD; Because ye say this
word, The burden of the LORD, and I have sent unto you, saying, Ye
shall not say, The burden of the LORD; 23:39 Therefore, behold, I,
even I, will utterly forget you, and I will forsake you, and the city
that I gave you and your fathers, and cast you out of my presence:
23:40 And I will bring an everlasting reproach upon you, and a
perpetual shame, which shall not be forgotten.

24:1 The LORD shewed me, and, behold, two baskets of figs were set
before the temple of the LORD, after that Nebuchadrezzar king of
Babylon had carried away captive Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim king of
Judah, and the princes of Judah, with the carpenters and smiths, from
Jerusalem, and had brought them to Babylon.

24:2 One basket had very good figs, even like the figs that are first
ripe: and the other basket had very naughty figs, which could not be
eaten, they were so bad.

24:3 Then said the LORD unto me, What seest thou, Jeremiah? And I
said, Figs; the good figs, very good; and the evil, very evil, that
cannot be eaten, they are so evil.

24:4 Again the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 24:5 Thus saith
the LORD, the God of Israel; Like these good figs, so will I
acknowledge them that are carried away captive of Judah, whom I have
sent out of this place into the land of the Chaldeans for their good.

24:6 For I will set mine eyes upon them for good, and I will bring
them again to this land: and I will build them, and not pull them
down; and I will plant them, and not pluck them up.

24:7 And I will give them an heart to know me, that I am the LORD: and
they shall be my people, and I will be their God: for they shall
return unto me with their whole heart.

24:8 And as the evil figs, which cannot be eaten, they are so evil;
surely thus saith the LORD, So will I give Zedekiah the king of Judah,
and his princes, and the residue of Jerusalem, that remain in this
land, and them that dwell in the land of Egypt: 24:9 And I will
deliver them to be removed into all the kingdoms of the earth for
their hurt, to be a reproach and a proverb, a taunt and a curse, in
all places whither I shall drive them.

24:10 And I will send the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, among
them, till they be consumed from off the land that I gave unto them
and to their fathers.

25:1 The word that came to Jeremiah concerning all the people of Judah
in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, that
was the first year of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon; 25:2 The which
Jeremiah the prophet spake unto all the people of Judah, and to all
the inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying, 25:3 From the thirteenth year of
Josiah the son of Amon king of Judah, even unto this day, that is the
three and twentieth year, the word of the LORD hath come unto me, and
I have spoken unto you, rising early and speaking; but ye have not
hearkened.

25:4 And the LORD hath sent unto you all his servants the prophets,
rising early and sending them; but ye have not hearkened, nor inclined
your ear to hear.

25:5 They said, Turn ye again now every one from his evil way, and
from the evil of your doings, and dwell in the land that the LORD hath
given unto you and to your fathers for ever and ever: 25:6 And go not
after other gods to serve them, and to worship them, and provoke me
not to anger with the works of your hands; and I will do you no hurt.

25:7 Yet ye have not hearkened unto me, saith the LORD; that ye might
provoke me to anger with the works of your hands to your own hurt.

25:8 Therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts; Because ye have not heard
my words, 25:9 Behold, I will send and take all the families of the
north, saith the LORD, and Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon, my
servant, and will bring them against this land, and against the
inhabitants thereof, and against all these nations round about, and
will utterly destroy them, and make them an astonishment, and an
hissing, and perpetual desolations.

25:10 Moreover I will take from them the voice of mirth, and the voice
of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the bride,
the sound of the millstones, and the light of the candle.

25:11 And this whole land shall be a desolation, and an astonishment;
and these nations shall serve the king of Babylon seventy years.

25:12 And it shall come to pass, when seventy years are accomplished,
that I will punish the king of Babylon, and that nation, saith the
LORD, for their iniquity, and the land of the Chaldeans, and will make
it perpetual desolations.

25:13 And I will bring upon that land all my words which I have
pronounced against it, even all that is written in this book, which
Jeremiah hath prophesied against all the nations.

25:14 For many nations and great kings shall serve themselves of them
also: and I will recompense them according to their deeds, and
according to the works of their own hands.

25:15 For thus saith the LORD God of Israel unto me; Take the wine cup
of this fury at my hand, and cause all the nations, to whom I send
thee, to drink it.

25:16 And they shall drink, and be moved, and be mad, because of the
sword that I will send among them.

25:17 Then took I the cup at the LORD's hand, and made all the nations
to drink, unto whom the LORD had sent me: 25:18 To wit, Jerusalem, and
the cities of Judah, and the kings thereof, and the princes thereof,
to make them a desolation, an astonishment, an hissing, and a curse;
as it is this day; 25:19 Pharaoh king of Egypt, and his servants, and
his princes, and all his people; 25:20 And all the mingled people, and
all the kings of the land of Uz, and all the kings of the land of the
Philistines, and Ashkelon, and Azzah, and Ekron, and the remnant of
Ashdod, 25:21 Edom, and Moab, and the children of Ammon, 25:22 And all
the kings of Tyrus, and all the kings of Zidon, and the kings of the
isles which are beyond the sea, 25:23 Dedan, and Tema, and Buz, and
all that are in the utmost corners, 25:24 And all the kings of Arabia,
and all the kings of the mingled people that dwell in the desert,
25:25 And all the kings of Zimri, and all the kings of Elam, and all
the kings of the Medes, 25:26 And all the kings of the north, far and
near, one with another, and all the kingdoms of the world, which are
upon the face of the earth: and the king of Sheshach shall drink after
them.

25:27 Therefore thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the LORD of
hosts, the God of Israel; Drink ye, and be drunken, and spue, and
fall, and rise no more, because of the sword which I will send among
you.

25:28 And it shall be, if they refuse to take the cup at thine hand to
drink, then shalt thou say unto them, Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Ye
shall certainly drink.

25:29 For, lo, I begin to bring evil on the city which is called by my
name, and should ye be utterly unpunished? Ye shall not be unpunished:
for I will call for a sword upon all the inhabitants of the earth,
saith the LORD of hosts.

25:30 Therefore prophesy thou against them all these words, and say
unto them, The LORD shall roar from on high, and utter his voice from
his holy habitation; he shall mightily roar upon his habitation; he
shall give a shout, as they that tread the grapes, against all the
inhabitants of the earth.

25:31 A noise shall come even to the ends of the earth; for the LORD
hath a controversy with the nations, he will plead with all flesh; he
will give them that are wicked to the sword, saith the LORD.

25:32 Thus saith the LORD of hosts, Behold, evil shall go forth from
nation to nation, and a great whirlwind shall be raised up from the
coasts of the earth.

25:33 And the slain of the LORD shall be at that day from one end of
the earth even unto the other end of the earth: they shall not be
lamented, neither gathered, nor buried; they shall be dung upon the
ground.

25:34 Howl, ye shepherds, and cry; and wallow yourselves in the ashes,
ye principal of the flock: for the days of your slaughter and of your
dispersions are accomplished; and ye shall fall like a pleasant
vessel.

25:35 And the shepherds shall have no way to flee, nor the principal
of the flock to escape.

25:36 A voice of the cry of the shepherds, and an howling of the
principal of the flock, shall be heard: for the LORD hath spoiled
their pasture.

25:37 And the peaceable habitations are cut down because of the fierce
anger of the LORD.

25:38 He hath forsaken his covert, as the lion: for their land is
desolate because of the fierceness of the oppressor, and because of
his fierce anger.

26:1 In the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king
of Judah came this word from the LORD, saying, 26:2 Thus saith the
LORD; Stand in the court of the LORD's house, and speak unto all the
cities of Judah, which come to worship in the LORD's house, all the
words that I command thee to speak unto them; diminish not a word:
26:3 If so be they will hearken, and turn every man from his evil way,
that I may repent me of the evil, which I purpose to do unto them
because of the evil of their doings.

26:4 And thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the LORD; If ye will not
hearken to me, to walk in my law, which I have set before you, 26:5 To
hearken to the words of my servants the prophets, whom I sent unto
you, both rising up early, and sending them, but ye have not
hearkened; 26:6 Then will I make this house like Shiloh, and will make
this city a curse to all the nations of the earth.

26:7 So the priests and the prophets and all the people heard Jeremiah
speaking these words in the house of the LORD.

26:8 Now it came to pass, when Jeremiah had made an end of speaking
all that the LORD had commanded him to speak unto all the people, that
the priests and the prophets and all the people took him, saying, Thou
shalt surely die.

26:9 Why hast thou prophesied in the name of the LORD, saying, This
house shall be like Shiloh, and this city shall be desolate without an
inhabitant?  And all the people were gathered against Jeremiah in the
house of the LORD.

26:10 When the princes of Judah heard these things, then they came up
from the king's house unto the house of the LORD, and sat down in the
entry of the new gate of the LORD's house.

26:11 Then spake the priests and the prophets unto the princes and to
all the people, saying, This man is worthy to die; for he hath
prophesied against this city, as ye have heard with your ears.

26:12 Then spake Jeremiah unto all the princes and to all the people,
saying, The LORD sent me to prophesy against this house and against
this city all the words that ye have heard.

26:13 Therefore now amend your ways and your doings, and obey the
voice of the LORD your God; and the LORD will repent him of the evil
that he hath pronounced against you.

26:14 As for me, behold, I am in your hand: do with me as seemeth good
and meet unto you.

26:15 But know ye for certain, that if ye put me to death, ye shall
surely bring innocent blood upon yourselves, and upon this city, and
upon the inhabitants thereof: for of a truth the LORD hath sent me
unto you to speak all these words in your ears.

26:16 Then said the princes and all the people unto the priests and to
the prophets; This man is not worthy to die: for he hath spoken to us
in the name of the LORD our God.

26:17 Then rose up certain of the elders of the land, and spake to all
the assembly of the people, saying, 26:18 Micah the Morasthite
prophesied in the days of Hezekiah king of Judah, and spake to all the
people of Judah, saying, Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Zion shall be
plowed like a field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the
mountain of the house as the high places of a forest.

26:19 Did Hezekiah king of Judah and all Judah put him at all to
death?  did he not fear the LORD, and besought the LORD, and the LORD
repented him of the evil which he had pronounced against them? Thus
might we procure great evil against our souls.

26:20 And there was also a man that prophesied in the name of the
LORD, Urijah the son of Shemaiah of Kirjathjearim, who prophesied
against this city and against this land according to all the words of
Jeremiah.

26:21 And when Jehoiakim the king, with all his mighty men, and all
the princes, heard his words, the king sought to put him to death: but
when Urijah heard it, he was afraid, and fled, and went into Egypt;
26:22 And Jehoiakim the king sent men into Egypt, namely, Elnathan the
son of Achbor, and certain men with him into Egypt.

26:23 And they fetched forth Urijah out of Egypt, and brought him unto
Jehoiakim the king; who slew him with the sword, and cast his dead
body into the graves of the common people.

26:24 Nevertheless the hand of Ahikam the son of Shaphan was with
Jeremiah, that they should not give him into the hand of the people to
put him to death.

27:1 In the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king
of Judah came this word unto Jeremiah from the LORD, saying, 27:2 Thus
saith the LORD to me; Make thee bonds and yokes, and put them upon thy
neck, 27:3 And send them to the king of Edom, and to the king of Moab,
and to the king of the Ammonites, and to the king of Tyrus, and to the
king of Zidon, by the hand of the messengers which come to Jerusalem
unto Zedekiah king of Judah; 27:4 And command them to say unto their
masters, Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Thus shall
ye say unto your masters; 27:5 I have made the earth, the man and the
beast that are upon the ground, by my great power and by my
outstretched arm, and have given it unto whom it seemed meet unto me.

27:6 And now have I given all these lands into the hand of
Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, my servant; and the beasts of the
field have I given him also to serve him.

27:7 And all nations shall serve him, and his son, and his son's son,
until the very time of his land come: and then many nations and great
kings shall serve themselves of him.

27:8 And it shall come to pass, that the nation and kingdom which will
not serve the same Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, and that will
not put their neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon, that nation
will I punish, saith the LORD, with the sword, and with the famine,
and with the pestilence, until I have consumed them by his hand.

27:9 Therefore hearken not ye to your prophets, nor to your diviners,
nor to your dreamers, nor to your enchanters, nor to your sorcerers,
which speak unto you, saying, Ye shall not serve the king of Babylon:
27:10 For they prophesy a lie unto you, to remove you far from your
land; and that I should drive you out, and ye should perish.

27:11 But the nations that bring their neck under the yoke of the king
of Babylon, and serve him, those will I let remain still in their own
land, saith the LORD; and they shall till it, and dwell therein.

27:12 I spake also to Zedekiah king of Judah according to all these
words, saying, Bring your necks under the yoke of the king of Babylon,
and serve him and his people, and live.

27:13 Why will ye die, thou and thy people, by the sword, by the
famine, and by the pestilence, as the LORD hath spoken against the
nation that will not serve the king of Babylon?  27:14 Therefore
hearken not unto the words of the prophets that speak unto you,
saying, Ye shall not serve the king of Babylon: for they prophesy a
lie unto you.

27:15 For I have not sent them, saith the LORD, yet they prophesy a
lie in my name; that I might drive you out, and that ye might perish,
ye, and the prophets that prophesy unto you.

27:16 Also I spake to the priests and to all this people, saying, Thus
saith the LORD; Hearken not to the words of your prophets that
prophesy unto you, saying, Behold, the vessels of the LORD's house
shall now shortly be brought again from Babylon: for they prophesy a
lie unto you.

27:17 Hearken not unto them; serve the king of Babylon, and live:
wherefore should this city be laid waste?  27:18 But if they be
prophets, and if the word of the LORD be with them, let them now make
intercession to the LORD of hosts, that the vessels which are left in
the house of the LORD, and in the house of the king of Judah, and at
Jerusalem, go not to Babylon.

27:19 For thus saith the LORD of hosts concerning the pillars, and
concerning the sea, and concerning the bases, and concerning the
residue of the vessels that remain in this city.

27:20 Which Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon took not, when he carried
away captive Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah from
Jerusalem to Babylon, and all the nobles of Judah and Jerusalem; 27:21
Yea, thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, concerning the
vessels that remain in the house of the LORD, and in the house of the
king of Judah and of Jerusalem; 27:22 They shall be carried to
Babylon, and there shall they be until the day that I visit them,
saith the LORD; then will I bring them up, and restore them to this
place.

28:1 And it came to pass the same year, in the beginning of the reign
of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the fourth year, and in the fifth month,
that Hananiah the son of Azur the prophet, which was of Gibeon, spake
unto me in the house of the LORD, in the presence of the priests and
of all the people, saying, 28:2 Thus speaketh the LORD of hosts, the
God of Israel, saying, I have broken the yoke of the king of Babylon.

28:3 Within two full years will I bring again into this place all the
vessels of the LORD's house, that Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon took
away from this place, and carried them to Babylon: 28:4 And I will
bring again to this place Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah,
with all the captives of Judah, that went into Babylon, saith the
LORD: for I will break the yoke of the king of Babylon.

28:5 Then the prophet Jeremiah said unto the prophet Hananiah in the
presence of the priests, and in the presence of all the people that
stood in the house of the LORD, 28:6 Even the prophet Jeremiah said,
Amen: the LORD do so: the LORD perform thy words which thou hast
prophesied, to bring again the vessels of the LORD's house, and all
that is carried away captive, from Babylon into this place.

28:7 Nevertheless hear thou now this word that I speak in thine ears,
and in the ears of all the people; 28:8 The prophets that have been
before me and before thee of old prophesied both against many
countries, and against great kingdoms, of war, and of evil, and of
pestilence.

28:9 The prophet which prophesieth of peace, when the word of the
prophet shall come to pass, then shall the prophet be known, that the
LORD hath truly sent him.

28:10 Then Hananiah the prophet took the yoke from off the prophet
Jeremiah's neck, and brake it.

28:11 And Hananiah spake in the presence of all the people, saying,
Thus saith the LORD; Even so will I break the yoke of Nebuchadnezzar
king of Babylon from the neck of all nations within the space of two
full years. And the prophet Jeremiah went his way.

28:12 Then the word of the LORD came unto Jeremiah the prophet, after
that Hananiah the prophet had broken the yoke from off the neck of the
prophet Jeremiah, saying, 28:13 Go and tell Hananiah, saying, Thus
saith the LORD; Thou hast broken the yokes of wood; but thou shalt
make for them yokes of iron.

28:14 For thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; I have put
a yoke of iron upon the neck of all these nations, that they may serve
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon; and they shall serve him: and I have
given him the beasts of the field also.

28:15 Then said the prophet Jeremiah unto Hananiah the prophet, Hear
now, Hananiah; The LORD hath not sent thee; but thou makest this
people to trust in a lie.

28:16 Therefore thus saith the LORD; Behold, I will cast thee from off
the face of the earth: this year thou shalt die, because thou hast
taught rebellion against the LORD.

28:17 So Hananiah the prophet died the same year in the seventh month.

29:1 Now these are the words of the letter that Jeremiah the prophet
sent from Jerusalem unto the residue of the elders which were carried
away captives, and to the priests, and to the prophets, and to all the
people whom Nebuchadnezzar had carried away captive from Jerusalem to
Babylon; 29:2 (After that Jeconiah the king, and the queen, and the
eunuchs, the princes of Judah and Jerusalem, and the carpenters, and
the smiths, were departed from Jerusalem;) 29:3 By the hand of Elasah
the son of Shaphan, and Gemariah the son of Hilkiah, (whom Zedekiah
king of Judah sent unto Babylon to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon)
saying, 29:4 Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, unto all
that are carried away captives, whom I have caused to be carried away
from Jerusalem unto Babylon; 29:5 Build ye houses, and dwell in them;
and plant gardens, and eat the fruit of them; 29:6 Take ye wives, and
beget sons and daughters; and take wives for your sons, and give your
daughters to husbands, that they may bear sons and daughters; that ye
may be increased there, and not diminished.

29:7 And seek the peace of the city whither I have caused you to be
carried away captives, and pray unto the LORD for it: for in the peace
thereof shall ye have peace.

29:8 For thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Let not your
prophets and your diviners, that be in the midst of you, deceive you,
neither hearken to your dreams which ye cause to be dreamed.

29:9 For they prophesy falsely unto you in my name: I have not sent
them, saith the LORD.

29:10 For thus saith the LORD, That after seventy years be
accomplished at Babylon I will visit you, and perform my good word
toward you, in causing you to return to this place.

29:11 For I know the thoughts that I think toward you, saith the LORD,
thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give you an expected end.

29:12 Then shall ye call upon me, and ye shall go and pray unto me,
and I will hearken unto you.

29:13 And ye shall seek me, and find me, when ye shall search for me
with all your heart.

29:14 And I will be found of you, saith the LORD: and I will turn away
your captivity, and I will gather you from all the nations, and from
all the places whither I have driven you, saith the LORD; and I will
bring you again into the place whence I caused you to be carried away
captive.

29:15 Because ye have said, The LORD hath raised us up prophets in
Babylon; 29:16 Know that thus saith the LORD of the king that sitteth
upon the throne of David, and of all the people that dwelleth in this
city, and of your brethren that are not gone forth with you into
captivity; 29:17 Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Behold, I will send
upon them the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, and will make
them like vile figs, that cannot be eaten, they are so evil.

29:18 And I will persecute them with the sword, with the famine, and
with the pestilence, and will deliver them to be removed to all the
kingdoms of the earth, to be a curse, and an astonishment, and an
hissing, and a reproach, among all the nations whither I have driven
them: 29:19 Because they have not hearkened to my words, saith the
LORD, which I sent unto them by my servants the prophets, rising up
early and sending them; but ye would not hear, saith the LORD.

29:20 Hear ye therefore the word of the LORD, all ye of the captivity,
whom I have sent from Jerusalem to Babylon: 29:21 Thus saith the LORD
of hosts, the God of Israel, of Ahab the son of Kolaiah, and of
Zedekiah the son of Maaseiah, which prophesy a lie unto you in my
name; Behold, I will deliver them into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king
of Babylon; and he shall slay them before your eyes; 29:22 And of them
shall be taken up a curse by all the captivity of Judah which are in
Babylon, saying, The LORD make thee like Zedekiah and like Ahab, whom
the king of Babylon roasted in the fire; 29:23 Because they have
committed villany in Israel, and have committed adultery with their
neighbours' wives, and have spoken lying words in my name, which I
have not commanded them; even I know, and am a witness, saith the
LORD.

29:24 Thus shalt thou also speak to Shemaiah the Nehelamite, saying,
29:25 Thus speaketh the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, saying,
Because thou hast sent letters in thy name unto all the people that
are at Jerusalem, and to Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah the priest, and
to all the priests, saying, 29:26 The LORD hath made thee priest in
the stead of Jehoiada the priest, that ye should be officers in the
house of the LORD, for every man that is mad, and maketh himself a
prophet, that thou shouldest put him in prison, and in the stocks.

29:27 Now therefore why hast thou not reproved Jeremiah of Anathoth,
which maketh himself a prophet to you?  29:28 For therefore he sent
unto us in Babylon, saying, This captivity is long: build ye houses,
and dwell in them; and plant gardens, and eat the fruit of them.

29:29 And Zephaniah the priest read this letter in the ears of
Jeremiah the prophet.

29:30 Then came the word of the LORD unto Jeremiah, saying, 29:31 Send
to all them of the captivity, saying, Thus saith the LORD concerning
Shemaiah the Nehelamite; Because that Shemaiah hath prophesied unto
you, and I sent him not, and he caused you to trust in a lie: 29:32
Therefore thus saith the LORD; Behold, I will punish Shemaiah the
Nehelamite, and his seed: he shall not have a man to dwell among this
people; neither shall he behold the good that I will do for my people,
saith the LORD; because he hath taught rebellion against the LORD.

30:1 The word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD, saying, 30:2 Thus
speaketh the LORD God of Israel, saying, Write thee all the words that
I have spoken unto thee in a book.

30:3 For, lo, the days come, saith the LORD, that I will bring again
the captivity of my people Israel and Judah, saith the LORD: and I
will cause them to return to the land that I gave to their fathers,
and they shall possess it.

30:4 And these are the words that the LORD spake concerning Israel and
concerning Judah.

30:5 For thus saith the LORD; We have heard a voice of trembling, of
fear, and not of peace.

30:6 Ask ye now, and see whether a man doth travail with child?
wherefore do I see every man with his hands on his loins, as a woman
in travail, and all faces are turned into paleness?  30:7 Alas! for
that day is great, so that none is like it: it is even the time of
Jacob's trouble, but he shall be saved out of it.

30:8 For it shall come to pass in that day, saith the LORD of hosts,
that I will break his yoke from off thy neck, and will burst thy
bonds, and strangers shall no more serve themselves of him: 30:9 But
they shall serve the LORD their God, and David their king, whom I will
raise up unto them.

30:10 Therefore fear thou not, O my servant Jacob, saith the LORD;
neither be dismayed, O Israel: for, lo, I will save thee from afar,
and thy seed from the land of their captivity; and Jacob shall return,
and shall be in rest, and be quiet, and none shall make him afraid.

30:11 For I am with thee, saith the LORD, to save thee: though I make
a full end of all nations whither I have scattered thee, yet I will
not make a full end of thee: but I will correct thee in measure, and
will not leave thee altogether unpunished.

30:12 For thus saith the LORD, Thy bruise is incurable, and thy wound
is grievous.

30:13 There is none to plead thy cause, that thou mayest be bound up:
thou hast no healing medicines.

30:14 All thy lovers have forgotten thee; they seek thee not; for I
have wounded thee with the wound of an enemy, with the chastisement of
a cruel one, for the multitude of thine iniquity; because thy sins
were increased.

30:15 Why criest thou for thine affliction? thy sorrow is incurable
for the multitude of thine iniquity: because thy sins were increased,
I have done these things unto thee.

30:16 Therefore all they that devour thee shall be devoured; and all
thine adversaries, every one of them, shall go into captivity; and
they that spoil thee shall be a spoil, and all that prey upon thee
will I give for a prey.

30:17 For I will restore health unto thee, and I will heal thee of thy
wounds, saith the LORD; because they called thee an Outcast, saying,
This is Zion, whom no man seeketh after.

30:18 Thus saith the LORD; Behold, I will bring again the captivity of
Jacob's tents, and have mercy on his dwellingplaces; and the city
shall be builded upon her own heap, and the palace shall remain after
the manner thereof.

30:19 And out of them shall proceed thanksgiving and the voice of them
that make merry: and I will multiply them, and they shall not be few;
I will also glorify them, and they shall not be small.

30:20 Their children also shall be as aforetime, and their
congregation shall be established before me, and I will punish all
that oppress them.

30:21 And their nobles shall be of themselves, and their governor
shall proceed from the midst of them; and I will cause him to draw
near, and he shall approach unto me: for who is this that engaged his
heart to approach unto me? saith the LORD.

30:22 And ye shall be my people, and I will be your God.

30:23 Behold, the whirlwind of the LORD goeth forth with fury, a
continuing whirlwind: it shall fall with pain upon the head of the
wicked.

30:24 The fierce anger of the LORD shall not return, until he hath
done it, and until he have performed the intents of his heart: in the
latter days ye shall consider it.

31:1 At the same time, saith the LORD, will I be the God of all the
families of Israel, and they shall be my people.

31:2 Thus saith the LORD, The people which were left of the sword
found grace in the wilderness; even Israel, when I went to cause him
to rest.

31:3 The LORD hath appeared of old unto me, saying, Yea, I have loved
thee with an everlasting love: therefore with lovingkindness have I
drawn thee.

31:4 Again I will build thee, and thou shalt be built, O virgin of
Israel: thou shalt again be adorned with thy tabrets, and shalt go
forth in the dances of them that make merry.

31:5 Thou shalt yet plant vines upon the mountains of Samaria: the
planters shall plant, and shall eat them as common things.

31:6 For there shall be a day, that the watchmen upon the mount
Ephraim shall cry, Arise ye, and let us go up to Zion unto the LORD
our God.

31:7 For thus saith the LORD; Sing with gladness for Jacob, and shout
among the chief of the nations: publish ye, praise ye, and say, O
LORD, save thy people, the remnant of Israel.

31:8 Behold, I will bring them from the north country, and gather them
from the coasts of the earth, and with them the blind and the lame,
the woman with child and her that travaileth with child together: a
great company shall return thither.

31:9 They shall come with weeping, and with supplications will I lead
them: I will cause them to walk by the rivers of waters in a straight
way, wherein they shall not stumble: for I am a father to Israel, and
Ephraim is my firstborn.

31:10 Hear the word of the LORD, O ye nations, and declare it in the
isles afar off, and say, He that scattered Israel will gather him, and
keep him, as a shepherd doth his flock.

31:11 For the LORD hath redeemed Jacob, and ransomed him from the hand
of him that was stronger than he.

31:12 Therefore they shall come and sing in the height of Zion, and
shall flow together to the goodness of the LORD, for wheat, and for
wine, and for oil, and for the young of the flock and of the herd: and
their soul shall be as a watered garden; and they shall not sorrow any
more at all.

31:13 Then shall the virgin rejoice in the dance, both young men and
old together: for I will turn their mourning into joy, and will
comfort them, and make them rejoice from their sorrow.

31:14 And I will satiate the soul of the priests with fatness, and my
people shall be satisfied with my goodness, saith the LORD.

31:15 Thus saith the LORD; A voice was heard in Ramah, lamentation,
and bitter weeping; Rahel weeping for her children refused to be
comforted for her children, because they were not.

31:16 Thus saith the LORD; Refrain thy voice from weeping, and thine
eyes from tears: for thy work shall be rewarded, saith the LORD; and
they shall come again from the land of the enemy.

31:17 And there is hope in thine end, saith the LORD, that thy
children shall come again to their own border.

31:18 I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus; Thou hast
chastised me, and I was chastised, as a bullock unaccustomed to the
yoke: turn thou me, and I shall be turned; for thou art the LORD my
God.

31:19 Surely after that I was turned, I repented; and after that I was
instructed, I smote upon my thigh: I was ashamed, yea, even
confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth.

31:20 Is Ephraim my dear son? is he a pleasant child? for since I
spake against him, I do earnestly remember him still: therefore my
bowels are troubled for him; I will surely have mercy upon him, saith
the LORD.

31:21 Set thee up waymarks, make thee high heaps: set thine heart
toward the highway, even the way which thou wentest: turn again, O
virgin of Israel, turn again to these thy cities.

31:22 How long wilt thou go about, O thou backsliding daughter? for
the LORD hath created a new thing in the earth, A woman shall compass
a man.

31:23 Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; As yet they
shall use this speech in the land of Judah and in the cities thereof,
when I shall bring again their captivity; The LORD bless thee, O
habitation of justice, and mountain of holiness.

31:24 And there shall dwell in Judah itself, and in all the cities
thereof together, husbandmen, and they that go forth with flocks.

31:25 For I have satiated the weary soul, and I have replenished every
sorrowful soul.

31:26 Upon this I awaked, and beheld; and my sleep was sweet unto me.

31:27 Behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that I will sow the house
of Israel and the house of Judah with the seed of man, and with the
seed of beast.

31:28 And it shall come to pass, that like as I have watched over
them, to pluck up, and to break down, and to throw down, and to
destroy, and to afflict; so will I watch over them, to build, and to
plant, saith the LORD.

31:29 In those days they shall say no more, The fathers have eaten a
sour grape, and the children's teeth are set on edge.

31:30 But every one shall die for his own iniquity: every man that
eateth the sour grape, his teeth shall be set on edge.

31:31 Behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that I will make a new
covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah: 31:32
Not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the
day that I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of
Egypt; which my covenant they brake, although I was an husband unto
them, saith the LORD: 31:33 But this shall be the covenant that I will
make with the house of Israel; After those days, saith the LORD, I
will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts;
and will be their God, and they shall be my people.

31:34 And they shall teach no more every man his neighbour, and every
man his brother, saying, Know the LORD: for they shall all know me,
from the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the LORD: for
I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more.

31:35 Thus saith the LORD, which giveth the sun for a light by day,
and the ordinances of the moon and of the stars for a light by night,
which divideth the sea when the waves thereof roar; The LORD of hosts
is his name: 31:36 If those ordinances depart from before me, saith
the LORD, then the seed of Israel also shall cease from being a nation
before me for ever.

31:37 Thus saith the LORD; If heaven above can be measured, and the
foundations of the earth searched out beneath, I will also cast off
all the seed of Israel for all that they have done, saith the LORD.

31:38 Behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that the city shall be
built to the LORD from the tower of Hananeel unto the gate of the
corner.

31:39 And the measuring line shall yet go forth over against it upon
the hill Gareb, and shall compass about to Goath.

31:40 And the whole valley of the dead bodies, and of the ashes, and
all the fields unto the brook of Kidron, unto the corner of the horse
gate toward the east, shall be holy unto the LORD; it shall not be
plucked up, nor thrown down any more for ever.

32:1 The word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD in the tenth year of
Zedekiah king of Judah, which was the eighteenth year of
Nebuchadrezzar.

32:2 For then the king of Babylon's army besieged Jerusalem: and
Jeremiah the prophet was shut up in the court of the prison, which was
in the king of Judah's house.

32:3 For Zedekiah king of Judah had shut him up, saying, Wherefore
dost thou prophesy, and say, Thus saith the LORD, Behold, I will give
this city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall take it;
32:4 And Zedekiah king of Judah shall not escape out of the hand of
the Chaldeans, but shall surely be delivered into the hand of the king
of Babylon, and shall speak with him mouth to mouth, and his eyes
shall behold his eyes; 32:5 And he shall lead Zedekiah to Babylon, and
there shall he be until I visit him, saith the LORD: though ye fight
with the Chaldeans, ye shall not prosper.

32:6 And Jeremiah said, The word of the LORD came unto me, saying,
32:7 Behold, Hanameel the son of Shallum thine uncle shall come unto
thee saying, Buy thee my field that is in Anathoth: for the right of
redemption is thine to buy it.

32:8 So Hanameel mine uncle's son came to me in the court of the
prison according to the word of the LORD, and said unto me, Buy my
field, I pray thee, that is in Anathoth, which is in the country of
Benjamin: for the right of inheritance is thine, and the redemption is
thine; buy it for thyself.

Then I knew that this was the word of the LORD.

32:9 And I bought the field of Hanameel my uncle's son, that was in
Anathoth, and weighed him the money, even seventeen shekels of silver.

32:10 And I subscribed the evidence, and sealed it, and took
witnesses, and weighed him the money in the balances.

32:11 So I took the evidence of the purchase, both that which was
sealed according to the law and custom, and that which was open: 32:12
And I gave the evidence of the purchase unto Baruch the son of Neriah,
the son of Maaseiah, in the sight of Hanameel mine uncle's son, and in
the presence of the witnesses that subscribed the book of the
purchase, before all the Jews that sat in the court of the prison.

32:13 And I charged Baruch before them, saying, 32:14 Thus saith the
LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Take these evidences, this evidence
of the purchase, both which is sealed, and this evidence which is
open; and put them in an earthen vessel, that they may continue many
days.

32:15 For thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Houses and
fields and vineyards shall be possessed again in this land.

32:16 Now when I had delivered the evidence of the purchase unto
Baruch the son of Neriah, I prayed unto the LORD, saying, 32:17 Ah
Lord GOD! behold, thou hast made the heaven and the earth by thy great
power and stretched out arm, and there is nothing too hard for thee:
32:18 Thou shewest lovingkindness unto thousands, and recompensest the
iniquity of the fathers into the bosom of their children after them:
the Great, the Mighty God, the LORD of hosts, is his name, 32:19 Great
in counsel, and mighty in work: for thine eyes are open upon all the
ways of the sons of men: to give every one according to his ways, and
according to the fruit of his doings: 32:20 Which hast set signs and
wonders in the land of Egypt, even unto this day, and in Israel, and
among other men; and hast made thee a name, as at this day; 32:21 And
hast brought forth thy people Israel out of the land of Egypt with
signs, and with wonders, and with a strong hand, and with a stretched
out arm, and with great terror; 32:22 And hast given them this land,
which thou didst swear to their fathers to give them, a land flowing
with milk and honey; 32:23 And they came in, and possessed it; but
they obeyed not thy voice, neither walked in thy law; they have done
nothing of all that thou commandedst them to do: therefore thou hast
caused all this evil to come upon them: 32:24 Behold the mounts, they
are come unto the city to take it; and the city is given into the hand
of the Chaldeans, that fight against it, because of the sword, and of
the famine, and of the pestilence: and what thou hast spoken is come
to pass; and, behold, thou seest it.

32:25 And thou hast said unto me, O Lord GOD, Buy thee the field for
money, and take witnesses; for the city is given into the hand of the
Chaldeans.

32:26 Then came the word of the LORD unto Jeremiah, saying, 32:27
Behold, I am the LORD, the God of all flesh: is there any thing too
hard for me?  32:28 Therefore thus saith the LORD; Behold, I will give
this city into the hand of the Chaldeans, and into the hand of
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and he shall take it: 32:29 And the
Chaldeans, that fight against this city, shall come and set fire on
this city, and burn it with the houses, upon whose roofs they have
offered incense unto Baal, and poured out drink offerings unto other
gods, to provoke me to anger.

32:30 For the children of Israel and the children of Judah have only
done evil before me from their youth: for the children of Israel have
only provoked me to anger with the work of their hands, saith the
LORD.

32:31 For this city hath been to me as a provocation of mine anger and
of my fury from the day that they built it even unto this day; that I
should remove it from before my face, 32:32 Because of all the evil of
the children of Israel and of the children of Judah, which they have
done to provoke me to anger, they, their kings, their princes, their
priests, and their prophets, and the men of Judah, and the inhabitants
of Jerusalem.

32:33 And they have turned unto me the back, and not the face: though
I taught them, rising up early and teaching them, yet they have not
hearkened to receive instruction.

32:34 But they set their abominations in the house, which is called by
my name, to defile it.

32:35 And they built the high places of Baal, which are in the valley
of the son of Hinnom, to cause their sons and their daughters to pass
through the fire unto Molech; which I commanded them not, neither came
it into my mind, that they should do this abomination, to cause Judah
to sin.

32:36 And now therefore thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel,
concerning this city, whereof ye say, It shall be delivered into the
hand of the king of Babylon by the sword, and by the famine, and by
the pestilence; 32:37 Behold, I will gather them out of all countries,
whither I have driven them in mine anger, and in my fury, and in great
wrath; and I will bring them again unto this place, and I will cause
them to dwell safely: 32:38 And they shall be my people, and I will be
their God: 32:39 And I will give them one heart, and one way, that
they may fear me for ever, for the good of them, and of their children
after them: 32:40 And I will make an everlasting covenant with them,
that I will not turn away from them, to do them good; but I will put
my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me.

32:41 Yea, I will rejoice over them to do them good, and I will plant
them in this land assuredly with my whole heart and with my whole
soul.

32:42 For thus saith the LORD; Like as I have brought all this great
evil upon this people, so will I bring upon them all the good that I
have promised them.

32:43 And fields shall be bought in this land, whereof ye say, It is
desolate without man or beast; it is given into the hand of the
Chaldeans.

32:44 Men shall buy fields for money, and subscribe evidences, and
seal them, and take witnesses in the land of Benjamin, and in the
places about Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah, and in the cities
of the mountains, and in the cities of the valley, and in the cities
of the south: for I will cause their captivity to return, saith the
LORD.

33:1 Moreover the word of the LORD came unto Jeremiah the second time,
while he was yet shut up in the court of the prison, saying, 33:2 Thus
saith the LORD the maker thereof, the LORD that formed it, to
establish it; the LORD is his name; 33:3 Call unto me, and I will
answer thee, and shew thee great and mighty things, which thou knowest
not.

33:4 For thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel, concerning the houses
of this city, and concerning the houses of the kings of Judah, which
are thrown down by the mounts, and by the sword; 33:5 They come to
fight with the Chaldeans, but it is to fill them with the dead bodies
of men, whom I have slain in mine anger and in my fury, and for all
whose wickedness I have hid my face from this city.

33:6 Behold, I will bring it health and cure, and I will cure them,
and will reveal unto them the abundance of peace and truth.

33:7 And I will cause the captivity of Judah and the captivity of
Israel to return, and will build them, as at the first.

33:8 And I will cleanse them from all their iniquity, whereby they
have sinned against me; and I will pardon all their iniquities,
whereby they have sinned, and whereby they have transgressed against
me.

33:9 And it shall be to me a name of joy, a praise and an honour
before all the nations of the earth, which shall hear all the good
that I do unto them: and they shall fear and tremble for all the
goodness and for all the prosperity that I procure unto it.

33:10 Thus saith the LORD; Again there shall be heard in this place,
which ye say shall be desolate without man and without beast, even in
the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, that are
desolate, without man, and without inhabitant, and without beast,
33:11 The voice of joy, and the voice of gladness, the voice of the
bridegroom, and the voice of the bride, the voice of them that shall
say, Praise the LORD of hosts: for the LORD is good; for his mercy
endureth for ever: and of them that shall bring the sacrifice of
praise into the house of the LORD. For I will cause to return the
captivity of the land, as at the first, saith the LORD.

33:12 Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Again in this place, which is
desolate without man and without beast, and in all the cities thereof,
shall be an habitation of shepherds causing their flocks to lie down.

33:13 In the cities of the mountains, in the cities of the vale, and
in the cities of the south, and in the land of Benjamin, and in the
places about Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah, shall the flocks
pass again under the hands of him that telleth them, saith the LORD.

33:14 Behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that I will perform that
good thing which I have promised unto the house of Israel and to the
house of Judah.

33:15 In those days, and at that time, will I cause the Branch of
righteousness to grow up unto David; and he shall execute judgment and
righteousness in the land.

33:16 In those days shall Judah be saved, and Jerusalem shall dwell
safely: and this is the name wherewith she shall be called, The LORD
our righteousness.

33:17 For thus saith the LORD; David shall never want a man to sit
upon the throne of the house of Israel; 33:18 Neither shall the
priests the Levites want a man before me to offer burnt offerings, and
to kindle meat offerings, and to do sacrifice continually.

33:19 And the word of the LORD came unto Jeremiah, saying, 33:20 Thus
saith the LORD; If ye can break my covenant of the day, and my
covenant of the night, and that there should not be day and night in
their season; 33:21 Then may also my covenant be broken with David my
servant, that he should not have a son to reign upon his throne; and
with the Levites the priests, my ministers.

33:22 As the host of heaven cannot be numbered, neither the sand of
the sea measured: so will I multiply the seed of David my servant, and
the Levites that minister unto me.

33:23 Moreover the word of the LORD came to Jeremiah, saying, 33:24
Considerest thou not what this people have spoken, saying, The two
families which the LORD hath chosen, he hath even cast them off? thus
they have despised my people, that they should be no more a nation
before them.

33:25 Thus saith the LORD; If my covenant be not with day and night,
and if I have not appointed the ordinances of heaven and earth; 33:26
Then will I cast away the seed of Jacob and David my servant, so that
I will not take any of his seed to be rulers over the seed of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob: for I will cause their captivity to return, and have
mercy on them.

34:1 The word which came unto Jeremiah from the LORD, when
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and all his army, and all the kingdoms
of the earth of his dominion, and all the people, fought against
Jerusalem, and against all the cities thereof, saying, 34:2 Thus saith
the LORD, the God of Israel; Go and speak to Zedekiah king of Judah,
and tell him, Thus saith the LORD; Behold, I will give this city into
the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall burn it with fire: 34:3
And thou shalt not escape out of his hand, but shalt surely be taken,
and delivered into his hand; and thine eyes shall behold the eyes of
the king of Babylon, and he shall speak with thee mouth to mouth, and
thou shalt go to Babylon.

34:4 Yet hear the word of the LORD, O Zedekiah king of Judah; Thus
saith the LORD of thee, Thou shalt not die by the sword: 34:5 But thou
shalt die in peace: and with the burnings of thy fathers, the former
kings which were before thee, so shall they burn odours for thee; and
they will lament thee, saying, Ah lord! for I have pronounced the
word, saith the LORD.

34:6 Then Jeremiah the prophet spake all these words unto Zedekiah
king of Judah in Jerusalem, 34:7 When the king of Babylon's army
fought against Jerusalem, and against all the cities of Judah that
were left, against Lachish, and against Azekah: for these defenced
cities remained of the cities of Judah.

34:8 This is the word that came unto Jeremiah from the LORD, after
that the king Zedekiah had made a covenant with all the people which
were at Jerusalem, to proclaim liberty unto them; 34:9 That every man
should let his manservant, and every man his maidservant, being an
Hebrew or an Hebrewess, go free; that none should serve himself of
them, to wit, of a Jew his brother.

34:10 Now when all the princes, and all the people, which had entered
into the covenant, heard that every one should let his manservant, and
every one his maidservant, go free, that none should serve themselves
of them any more, then they obeyed, and let them go.

34:11 But afterward they turned, and caused the servants and the
handmaids, whom they had let go free, to return, and brought them into
subjection for servants and for handmaids.

34:12 Therefore the word of the LORD came to Jeremiah from the LORD,
saying, 34:13 Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel; I made a
covenant with your fathers in the day that I brought them forth out of
the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondmen, saying, 34:14 At the
end of seven years let ye go every man his brother an Hebrew, which
hath been sold unto thee; and when he hath served thee six years, thou
shalt let him go free from thee: but your fathers hearkened not unto
me, neither inclined their ear.

34:15 And ye were now turned, and had done right in my sight, in
proclaiming liberty every man to his neighbour; and ye had made a
covenant before me in the house which is called by my name: 34:16 But
ye turned and polluted my name, and caused every man his servant, and
every man his handmaid, whom ye had set at liberty at their pleasure,
to return, and brought them into subjection, to be unto you for
servants and for handmaids.

34:17 Therefore thus saith the LORD; Ye have not hearkened unto me, in
proclaiming liberty, every one to his brother, and every man to his
neighbour: behold, I proclaim a liberty for you, saith the LORD, to
the sword, to the pestilence, and to the famine; and I will make you
to be removed into all the kingdoms of the earth.

34:18 And I will give the men that have transgressed my covenant,
which have not performed the words of the covenant which they had made
before me, when they cut the calf in twain, and passed between the
parts thereof, 34:19 The princes of Judah, and the princes of
Jerusalem, the eunuchs, and the priests, and all the people of the
land, which passed between the parts of the calf; 34:20 I will even
give them into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of them
that seek their life: and their dead bodies shall be for meat unto the
fowls of the heaven, and to the beasts of the earth.

34:21 And Zedekiah king of Judah and his princes will I give into the
hand of their enemies, and into the hand of them that seek their life,
and into the hand of the king of Babylon's army, which are gone up
from you.

34:22 Behold, I will command, saith the LORD, and cause them to return
to this city; and they shall fight against it, and take it, and burn
it with fire: and I will make the cities of Judah a desolation without
an inhabitant.

35:1 The word which came unto Jeremiah from the LORD in the days of
Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah, saying, 35:2 Go unto the
house of the Rechabites, and speak unto them, and bring them into the
house of the LORD, into one of the chambers, and give them wine to
drink.

35:3 Then I took Jaazaniah the son of Jeremiah, the son of Habaziniah,
and his brethren, and all his sons, and the whole house of the
Rechabites; 35:4 And I brought them into the house of the LORD, into
the chamber of the sons of Hanan, the son of Igdaliah, a man of God,
which was by the chamber of the princes, which was above the chamber
of Maaseiah the son of Shallum, the keeper of the door: 35:5 And I set
before the sons of the house of the Rechabites pots full of wine, and
cups, and I said unto them, Drink ye wine.

35:6 But they said, We will drink no wine: for Jonadab the son of
Rechab our father commanded us, saying, Ye shall drink no wine,
neither ye, nor your sons for ever: 35:7 Neither shall ye build house,
nor sow seed, nor plant vineyard, nor have any: but all your days ye
shall dwell in tents; that ye may live many days in the land where ye
be strangers.

35:8 Thus have we obeyed the voice of Jonadab the son of Rechab our
father in all that he hath charged us, to drink no wine all our days,
we, our wives, our sons, nor our daughters; 35:9 Nor to build houses
for us to dwell in: neither have we vineyard, nor field, nor seed:
35:10 But we have dwelt in tents, and have obeyed, and done according
to all that Jonadab our father commanded us.

35:11 But it came to pass, when Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon came up
into the land, that we said, Come, and let us go to Jerusalem for fear
of the army of the Chaldeans, and for fear of the army of the Syrians:
so we dwell at Jerusalem.

35:12 Then came the word of the LORD unto Jeremiah, saying, 35:13 Thus
saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Go and tell the men of
Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, Will ye not receive
instruction to hearken to my words? saith the LORD.

35:14 The words of Jonadab the son of Rechab, that he commanded his
sons not to drink wine, are performed; for unto this day they drink
none, but obey their father's commandment: notwithstanding I have
spoken unto you, rising early and speaking; but ye hearkened not unto
me.

35:15 I have sent also unto you all my servants the prophets, rising
up early and sending them, saying, Return ye now every man from his
evil way, and amend your doings, and go not after other gods to serve
them, and ye shall dwell in the land which I have given to you and to
your fathers: but ye have not inclined your ear, nor hearkened unto
me.

35:16 Because the sons of Jonadab the son of Rechab have performed the
commandment of their father, which he commanded them; but this people
hath not hearkened unto me: 35:17 Therefore thus saith the LORD God of
hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will bring upon Judah and upon all
the inhabitants of Jerusalem all the evil that I have pronounced
against them: because I have spoken unto them, but they have not
heard; and I have called unto them, but they have not answered.

35:18 And Jeremiah said unto the house of the Rechabites, Thus saith
the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Because ye have obeyed the
commandment of Jonadab your father, and kept all his precepts, and
done according unto all that he hath commanded you: 35:19 Therefore
thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Jonadab the son of
Rechab shall not want a man to stand before me for ever.

36:1 And it came to pass in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of
Josiah king of Judah, that this word came unto Jeremiah from the LORD,
saying, 36:2 Take thee a roll of a book, and write therein all the
words that I have spoken unto thee against Israel, and against Judah,
and against all the nations, from the day I spake unto thee, from the
days of Josiah, even unto this day.

36:3 It may be that the house of Judah will hear all the evil which I
purpose to do unto them; that they may return every man from his evil
way; that I may forgive their iniquity and their sin.

36:4 Then Jeremiah called Baruch the son of Neriah: and Baruch wrote
from the mouth of Jeremiah all the words of the LORD, which he had
spoken unto him, upon a roll of a book.

36:5 And Jeremiah commanded Baruch, saying, I am shut up; I cannot go
into the house of the LORD: 36:6 Therefore go thou, and read in the
roll, which thou hast written from my mouth, the words of the LORD in
the ears of the people in the LORD's house upon the fasting day: and
also thou shalt read them in the ears of all Judah that come out of
their cities.

36:7 It may be they will present their supplication before the LORD,
and will return every one from his evil way: for great is the anger
and the fury that the LORD hath pronounced against this people.

36:8 And Baruch the son of Neriah did according to all that Jeremiah
the prophet commanded him, reading in the book the words of the LORD
in the LORD's house.

36:9 And it came to pass in the fifth year of Jehoiakim the son of
Josiah king of Judah, in the ninth month, that they proclaimed a fast
before the LORD to all the people in Jerusalem, and to all the people
that came from the cities of Judah unto Jerusalem.

36:10 Then read Baruch in the book the words of Jeremiah in the house
of the LORD, in the chamber of Gemariah the son of Shaphan the scribe,
in the higher court, at the entry of the new gate of the LORD's house,
in the ears of all the people.

36:11 When Michaiah the son of Gemariah, the son of Shaphan, had heard
out of the book all the words of the LORD, 36:12 Then he went down
into the king's house, into the scribe's chamber: and, lo, all the
princes sat there, even Elishama the scribe, and Delaiah the son of
Shemaiah, and Elnathan the son of Achbor, and Gemariah the son of
Shaphan, and Zedekiah the son of Hananiah, and all the princes.

36:13 Then Michaiah declared unto them all the words that he had
heard, when Baruch read the book in the ears of the people.

36:14 Therefore all the princes sent Jehudi the son of Nethaniah, the
son of Shelemiah, the son of Cushi, unto Baruch, saying, Take in thine
hand the roll wherein thou hast read in the ears of the people, and
come. So Baruch the son of Neriah took the roll in his hand, and came
unto them.

36:15 And they said unto him, Sit down now, and read it in our ears.
So Baruch read it in their ears.

36:16 Now it came to pass, when they had heard all the words, they
were afraid both one and other, and said unto Baruch, We will surely
tell the king of all these words.

36:17 And they asked Baruch, saying, Tell us now, How didst thou write
all these words at his mouth?  36:18 Then Baruch answered them, He
pronounced all these words unto me with his mouth, and I wrote them
with ink in the book.

36:19 Then said the princes unto Baruch, Go, hide thee, thou and
Jeremiah; and let no man know where ye be.

36:20 And they went in to the king into the court, but they laid up
the roll in the chamber of Elishama the scribe, and told all the words
in the ears of the king.

36:21 So the king sent Jehudi to fetch the roll: and he took it out of
Elishama the scribe's chamber. And Jehudi read it in the ears of the
king, and in the ears of all the princes which stood beside the king.

36:22 Now the king sat in the winterhouse in the ninth month: and
there was a fire on the hearth burning before him.

36:23 And it came to pass, that when Jehudi had read three or four
leaves, he cut it with the penknife, and cast it into the fire that
was on the hearth, until all the roll was consumed in the fire that
was on the hearth.

36:24 Yet they were not afraid, nor rent their garments, neither the
king, nor any of his servants that heard all these words.

36:25 Nevertheless Elnathan and Delaiah and Gemariah had made
intercession to the king that he would not burn the roll: but he would
not hear them.

36:26 But the king commanded Jerahmeel the son of Hammelech, and
Seraiah the son of Azriel, and Shelemiah the son of Abdeel, to take
Baruch the scribe and Jeremiah the prophet: but the LORD hid them.

36:27 Then the word of the LORD came to Jeremiah, after that the king
had burned the roll, and the words which Baruch wrote at the mouth of
Jeremiah, saying, 36:28 Take thee again another roll, and write in it
all the former words that were in the first roll, which Jehoiakim the
king of Judah hath burned.

36:29 And thou shalt say to Jehoiakim king of Judah, Thus saith the
LORD; Thou hast burned this roll, saying, Why hast thou written
therein, saying, The king of Babylon shall certainly come and destroy
this land, and shall cause to cease from thence man and beast?  36:30
Therefore thus saith the LORD of Jehoiakim king of Judah; He shall
have none to sit upon the throne of David: and his dead body shall be
cast out in the day to the heat, and in the night to the frost.

36:31 And I will punish him and his seed and his servants for their
iniquity; and I will bring upon them, and upon the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, and upon the men of Judah, all the evil that I have
pronounced against them; but they hearkened not.

36:32 Then took Jeremiah another roll, and gave it to Baruch the
scribe, the son of Neriah; who wrote therein from the mouth of
Jeremiah all the words of the book which Jehoiakim king of Judah had
burned in the fire: and there were added besides unto them many like
words.

37:1 And king Zedekiah the son of Josiah reigned instead of Coniah the
son of Jehoiakim, whom Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon made king in the
land of Judah.

37:2 But neither he, nor his servants, nor the people of the land, did
hearken unto the words of the LORD, which he spake by the prophet
Jeremiah.

37:3 And Zedekiah the king sent Jehucal the son of Shelemiah and
Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah the priest to the prophet Jeremiah,
saying, Pray now unto the LORD our God for us.

37:4 Now Jeremiah came in and went out among the people: for they had
not put him into prison.

37:5 Then Pharaoh's army was come forth out of Egypt: and when the
Chaldeans that besieged Jerusalem heard tidings of them, they departed
from Jerusalem.

37:6 Then came the word of the LORD unto the prophet Jeremiah saying,
37:7 Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel; Thus shall ye say to the
king of Judah, that sent you unto me to enquire of me; Behold,
Pharaoh's army, which is come forth to help you, shall return to Egypt
into their own land.

37:8 And the Chaldeans shall come again, and fight against this city,
and take it, and burn it with fire.

37:9 Thus saith the LORD; Deceive not yourselves, saying, The
Chaldeans shall surely depart from us: for they shall not depart.

37:10 For though ye had smitten the whole army of the Chaldeans that
fight against you, and there remained but wounded men among them, yet
should they rise up every man in his tent, and burn this city with
fire.

37:11 And it came to pass, that when the army of the Chaldeans was
broken up from Jerusalem for fear of Pharaoh's army, 37:12 Then
Jeremiah went forth out of Jerusalem to go into the land of Benjamin,
to separate himself thence in the midst of the people.

37:13 And when he was in the gate of Benjamin, a captain of the ward
was there, whose name was Irijah, the son of Shelemiah, the son of
Hananiah; and he took Jeremiah the prophet, saying, Thou fallest away
to the Chaldeans.

37:14 Then said Jeremiah, It is false; I fall not away to the
Chaldeans.

But he hearkened not to him: so Irijah took Jeremiah, and brought him
to the princes.

37:15 Wherefore the princes were wroth with Jeremiah, and smote him,
and put him in prison in the house of Jonathan the scribe: for they
had made that the prison.

37:16 When Jeremiah was entered into the dungeon, and into the cabins,
and Jeremiah had remained there many days; 37:17 Then Zedekiah the
king sent, and took him out: and the king asked him secretly in his
house, and said, Is there any word from the LORD? And Jeremiah said,
There is: for, said he, thou shalt be delivered into the hand of the
king of Babylon.

37:18 Moreover Jeremiah said unto king Zedekiah, What have I offended
against thee, or against thy servants, or against this people, that ye
have put me in prison?  37:19 Where are now your prophets which
prophesied unto you, saying, The king of Babylon shall not come
against you, nor against this land?  37:20 Therefore hear now, I pray
thee, O my lord the king: let my supplication, I pray thee, be
accepted before thee; that thou cause me not to return to the house of
Jonathan the scribe, lest I die there.

37:21 Then Zedekiah the king commanded that they should commit
Jeremiah into the court of the prison, and that they should give him
daily a piece of bread out of the bakers' street, until all the bread
in the city were spent.

Thus Jeremiah remained in the court of the prison.

38:1 Then Shephatiah the son of Mattan, and Gedaliah the son of
Pashur, and Jucal the son of Shelemiah, and Pashur the son of
Malchiah, heard the words that Jeremiah had spoken unto all the
people, saying, 38:2 Thus saith the LORD, He that remaineth in this
city shall die by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence: but
he that goeth forth to the Chaldeans shall live; for he shall have his
life for a prey, and shall live.

38:3 Thus saith the LORD, This city shall surely be given into the
hand of the king of Babylon's army, which shall take it.

38:4 Therefore the princes said unto the king, We beseech thee, let
this man be put to death: for thus he weakeneth the hands of the men
of war that remain in this city, and the hands of all the people, in
speaking such words unto them: for this man seeketh not the welfare of
this people, but the hurt.

38:5 Then Zedekiah the king said, Behold, he is in your hand: for the
king is not he that can do any thing against you.

38:6 Then took they Jeremiah, and cast him into the dungeon of
Malchiah the son of Hammelech, that was in the court of the prison:
and they let down Jeremiah with cords. And in the dungeon there was no
water, but mire: so Jeremiah sunk in the mire.

38:7 Now when Ebedmelech the Ethiopian, one of the eunuchs which was
in the king's house, heard that they had put Jeremiah in the dungeon;
the king then sitting in the gate of Benjamin; 38:8 Ebedmelech went
forth out of the king's house, and spake to the king saying, 38:9 My
lord the king, these men have done evil in all that they have done to
Jeremiah the prophet, whom they have cast into the dungeon; and he is
like to die for hunger in the place where he is: for there is no more
bread in the city.

38:10 Then the king commanded Ebedmelech the Ethiopian, saying, Take
from hence thirty men with thee, and take up Jeremiah the prophet out
of the dungeon, before he die.

38:11 So Ebedmelech took the men with him, and went into the house of
the king under the treasury, and took thence old cast clouts and old
rotten rags, and let them down by cords into the dungeon to Jeremiah.

38:12 And Ebedmelech the Ethiopian said unto Jeremiah, Put now these
old cast clouts and rotten rags under thine armholes under the cords.
And Jeremiah did so.

38:13 So they drew up Jeremiah with cords, and took him up out of the
dungeon: and Jeremiah remained in the court of the prison.

38:14 Then Zedekiah the king sent, and took Jeremiah the prophet unto
him into the third entry that is in the house of the LORD: and the
king said unto Jeremiah, I will ask thee a thing; hide nothing from
me.

38:15 Then Jeremiah said unto Zedekiah, If I declare it unto thee,
wilt thou not surely put me to death? and if I give thee counsel, wilt
thou not hearken unto me?  38:16 So Zedekiah the king sware secretly
unto Jeremiah, saying, As the LORD liveth, that made us this soul, I
will not put thee to death, neither will I give thee into the hand of
these men that seek thy life.

38:17 Then said Jeremiah unto Zedekiah, Thus saith the LORD, the God
of hosts, the God of Israel; If thou wilt assuredly go forth unto the
king of Babylon's princes, then thy soul shall live, and this city
shall not be burned with fire; and thou shalt live, and thine house:
38:18 But if thou wilt not go forth to the king of Babylon's princes,
then shall this city be given into the hand of the Chaldeans, and they
shall burn it with fire, and thou shalt not escape out of their hand.

38:19 And Zedekiah the king said unto Jeremiah, I am afraid of the
Jews that are fallen to the Chaldeans, lest they deliver me into their
hand, and they mock me.

38:20 But Jeremiah said, They shall not deliver thee. Obey, I beseech
thee, the voice of the LORD, which I speak unto thee: so it shall be
well unto thee, and thy soul shall live.

38:21 But if thou refuse to go forth, this is the word that the LORD
hath shewed me: 38:22 And, behold, all the women that are left in the
king of Judah's house shall be brought forth to the king of Babylon's
princes, and those women shall say, Thy friends have set thee on, and
have prevailed against thee: thy feet are sunk in the mire, and they
are turned away back.

38:23 So they shall bring out all thy wives and thy children to the
Chaldeans: and thou shalt not escape out of their hand, but shalt be
taken by the hand of the king of Babylon: and thou shalt cause this
city to be burned with fire.

38:24 Then said Zedekiah unto Jeremiah, Let no man know of these
words, and thou shalt not die.

38:25 But if the princes hear that I have talked with thee, and they
come unto thee, and say unto thee, Declare unto us now what thou hast
said unto the king, hide it not from us, and we will not put thee to
death; also what the king said unto thee: 38:26 Then thou shalt say
unto them, I presented my supplication before the king, that he would
not cause me to return to Jonathan's house, to die there.

38:27 Then came all the princes unto Jeremiah, and asked him: and he
told them according to all these words that the king had commanded. So
they left off speaking with him; for the matter was not perceived.

38:28 So Jeremiah abode in the court of the prison until the day that
Jerusalem was taken: and he was there when Jerusalem was taken.

39:1 In the ninth year of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the tenth month,
came Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon and all his army against
Jerusalem, and they besieged it.

39:2 And in the eleventh year of Zedekiah, in the fourth month, the
ninth day of the month, the city was broken up.

39:3 And all the princes of the king of Babylon came in, and sat in
the middle gate, even Nergalsharezer, Samgarnebo, Sarsechim, Rabsaris,
Nergalsharezer, Rabmag, with all the residue of the princes of the
king of Babylon.

39:4 And it came to pass, that when Zedekiah the king of Judah saw
them, and all the men of war, then they fled, and went forth out of
the city by night, by the way of the king's garden, by the gate
betwixt the two walls: and he went out the way of the plain.

39:5 But the Chaldeans' army pursued after them, and overtook Zedekiah
in the plains of Jericho: and when they had taken him, they brought
him up to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon to Riblah in the land of
Hamath, where he gave judgment upon him.

39:6 Then the king of Babylon slew the sons of Zedekiah in Riblah
before his eyes: also the king of Babylon slew all the nobles of
Judah.

39:7 Moreover he put out Zedekiah's eyes, and bound him with chains,
to carry him to Babylon.

39:8 And the Chaldeans burned the king's house, and the houses of the
people, with fire, and brake down the walls of Jerusalem.

39:9 Then Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carried away captive
into Babylon the remnant of the people that remained in the city, and
those that fell away, that fell to him, with the rest of the people
that remained.

39:10 But Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard left of the poor of the
people, which had nothing, in the land of Judah, and gave them
vineyards and fields at the same time.

39:11 Now Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon gave charge concerning
Jeremiah to Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard, saying, 39:12 Take
him, and look well to him, and do him no harm; but do unto him even as
he shall say unto thee.

39:13 So Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard sent, and Nebushasban,
Rabsaris, and Nergalsharezer, Rabmag, and all the king of Babylon's
princes; 39:14 Even they sent, and took Jeremiah out of the court of
the prison, and committed him unto Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son
of Shaphan, that he should carry him home: so he dwelt among the
people.

39:15 Now the word of the LORD came unto Jeremiah, while he was shut
up in the court of the prison, saying, 39:16 Go and speak to
Ebedmelech the Ethiopian, saying, Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the
God of Israel; Behold, I will bring my words upon this city for evil,
and not for good; and they shall be accomplished in that day before
thee.

39:17 But I will deliver thee in that day, saith the LORD: and thou
shalt not be given into the hand of the men of whom thou art afraid.

39:18 For I will surely deliver thee, and thou shalt not fall by the
sword, but thy life shall be for a prey unto thee: because thou hast
put thy trust in me, saith the LORD.

40:1 The word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD, after that
Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard had let him go from Ramah, when
he had taken him being bound in chains among all that were carried
away captive of Jerusalem and Judah, which were carried away captive
unto Babylon.

40:2 And the captain of the guard took Jeremiah, and said unto him,
The LORD thy God hath pronounced this evil upon this place.

40:3 Now the LORD hath brought it, and done according as he hath said:
because ye have sinned against the LORD, and have not obeyed his
voice, therefore this thing is come upon you.

40:4 And now, behold, I loose thee this day from the chains which were
upon thine hand. If it seem good unto thee to come with me into
Babylon, come; and I will look well unto thee: but if it seem ill unto
thee to come with me into Babylon, forbear: behold, all the land is
before thee: whither it seemeth good and convenient for thee to go,
thither go.

40:5 Now while he was not yet gone back, he said, Go back also to
Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan, whom the king of
Babylon hath made governor over the cities of Judah, and dwell with
him among the people: or go wheresoever it seemeth convenient unto
thee to go. So the captain of the guard gave him victuals and a
reward, and let him go.

40:6 Then went Jeremiah unto Gedaliah the son of Ahikam to Mizpah; and
dwelt with him among the people that were left in the land.

40:7 Now when all the captains of the forces which were in the fields,
even they and their men, heard that the king of Babylon had made
Gedaliah the son of Ahikam governor in the land, and had committed
unto him men, and women, and children, and of the poor of the land, of
them that were not carried away captive to Babylon; 40:8 Then they
came to Gedaliah to Mizpah, even Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and
Johanan and Jonathan the sons of Kareah, and Seraiah the son of
Tanhumeth, and the sons of Ephai the Netophathite, and Jezaniah the
son of a Maachathite, they and their men.

40:9 And Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan sware unto them
and to their men, saying, Fear not to serve the Chaldeans: dwell in
the land, and serve the king of Babylon, and it shall be well with
you.

40:10 As for me, behold, I will dwell at Mizpah, to serve the
Chaldeans, which will come unto us: but ye, gather ye wine, and summer
fruits, and oil, and put them in your vessels, and dwell in your
cities that ye have taken.

40:11 Likewise when all the Jews that were in Moab, and among the
Ammonites, and in Edom, and that were in all the countries, heard that
the king of Babylon had left a remnant of Judah, and that he had set
over them Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan; 40:12 Even
all the Jews returned out of all places whither they were driven, and
came to the land of Judah, to Gedaliah, unto Mizpah, and gathered wine
and summer fruits very much.

40:13 Moreover Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the
forces that were in the fields, came to Gedaliah to Mizpah, 40:14 And
said unto him, Dost thou certainly know that Baalis the king of the
Ammonites hath sent Ishmael the son of Nethaniah to slay thee? But
Gedaliah the son of Ahikam believed them not.

40:15 Then Johanan the son of Kareah spake to Gedaliah in Mizpah
secretly saying, Let me go, I pray thee, and I will slay Ishmael the
son of Nethaniah, and no man shall know it: wherefore should he slay
thee, that all the Jews which are gathered unto thee should be
scattered, and the remnant in Judah perish?  40:16 But Gedaliah the
son of Ahikam said unto Johanan the son of Kareah, Thou shalt not do
this thing: for thou speakest falsely of Ishmael.

41:1 Now it came to pass in the seventh month, that Ishmael the son of
Nethaniah the son of Elishama, of the seed royal, and the princes of
the king, even ten men with him, came unto Gedaliah the son of Ahikam
to Mizpah; and there they did eat bread together in Mizpah.

41:2 Then arose Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and the ten men that
were with him, and smote Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan
with the sword, and slew him, whom the king of Babylon had made
governor over the land.

41:3 Ishmael also slew all the Jews that were with him, even with
Gedaliah, at Mizpah, and the Chaldeans that were found there, and the
men of war.

41:4 And it came to pass the second day after he had slain Gedaliah,
and no man knew it, 41:5 That there came certain from Shechem, from
Shiloh, and from Samaria, even fourscore men, having their beards
shaven, and their clothes rent, and having cut themselves, with
offerings and incense in their hand, to bring them to the house of the
LORD.

41:6 And Ishmael the son of Nethaniah went forth from Mizpah to meet
them, weeping all along as he went: and it came to pass, as he met
them, he said unto them, Come to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam.

41:7 And it was so, when they came into the midst of the city, that
Ishmael the son of Nethaniah slew them, and cast them into the midst
of the pit, he, and the men that were with him.

41:8 But ten men were found among them that said unto Ishmael, Slay us
not: for we have treasures in the field, of wheat, and of barley, and
of oil, and of honey. So he forbare, and slew them not among their
brethren.

41:9 Now the pit wherein Ishmael had cast all the dead bodies of the
men, whom he had slain because of Gedaliah, was it which Asa the king
had made for fear of Baasha king of Israel: and Ishmael the son of
Nethaniah filled it with them that were slain.

41:10 Then Ishmael carried away captive all the residue of the people
that were in Mizpah, even the king's daughters, and all the people
that remained in Mizpah, whom Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard had
committed to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam: and Ishmael the son of
Nethaniah carried them away captive, and departed to go over to the
Ammonites.

41:11 But when Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the
forces that were with him, heard of all the evil that Ishmael the son
of Nethaniah had done, 41:12 Then they took all the men, and went to
fight with Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and found him by the great
waters that are in Gibeon.

41:13 Now it came to pass, that when all the people which were with
Ishmael saw Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the
forces that were with him, then they were glad.

41:14 So all the people that Ishmael had carried away captive from
Mizpah cast about and returned, and went unto Johanan the son of
Kareah.

41:15 But Ishmael the son of Nethaniah escaped from Johanan with eight
men, and went to the Ammonites.

41:16 Then took Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the
forces that were with him, all the remnant of the people whom he had
recovered from Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, from Mizpah, after that
he had slain Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, even mighty men of war, and
the women, and the children, and the eunuchs, whom he had brought
again from Gibeon: 41:17 And they departed, and dwelt in the
habitation of Chimham, which is by Bethlehem, to go to enter into
Egypt, 41:18 Because of the Chaldeans: for they were afraid of them,
because Ishmael the son of Nethaniah had slain Gedaliah the son of
Ahikam, whom the king of Babylon made governor in the land.

42:1 Then all the captains of the forces, and Johanan the son of
Kareah, and Jezaniah the son of Hoshaiah, and all the people from the
least even unto the greatest, came near, 42:2 And said unto Jeremiah
the prophet, Let, we beseech thee, our supplication be accepted before
thee, and pray for us unto the LORD thy God, even for all this
remnant; (for we are left but a few of many, as thine eyes do behold
us:) 42:3 That the LORD thy God may shew us the way wherein we may
walk, and the thing that we may do.

42:4 Then Jeremiah the prophet said unto them, I have heard you;
behold, I will pray unto the LORD your God according to your words;
and it shall come to pass, that whatsoever thing the LORD shall answer
you, I will declare it unto you; I will keep nothing back from you.

42:5 Then they said to Jeremiah, The LORD be a true and faithful
witness between us, if we do not even according to all things for the
which the LORD thy God shall send thee to us.

42:6 Whether it be good, or whether it be evil, we will obey the voice
of the LORD our God, to whom we send thee; that it may be well with
us, when we obey the voice of the LORD our God.

42:7 And it came to pass after ten days, that the word of the LORD
came unto Jeremiah.

42:8 Then called he Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of
the forces which were with him, and all the people from the least even
to the greatest, 42:9 And said unto them, Thus saith the LORD, the God
of Israel, unto whom ye sent me to present your supplication before
him; 42:10 If ye will still abide in this land, then will I build you,
and not pull you down, and I will plant you, and not pluck you up: for
I repent me of the evil that I have done unto you.

42:11 Be not afraid of the king of Babylon, of whom ye are afraid; be
not afraid of him, saith the LORD: for I am with you to save you, and
to deliver you from his hand.

42:12 And I will shew mercies unto you, that he may have mercy upon
you, and cause you to return to your own land.

42:13 But if ye say, We will not dwell in this land, neither obey the
voice of the LORD your God, 42:14 Saying, No; but we will go into the
land of Egypt, where we shall see no war, nor hear the sound of the
trumpet, nor have hunger of bread; and there will we dwell: 42:15 And
now therefore hear the word of the LORD, ye remnant of Judah; Thus
saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; If ye wholly set your
faces to enter into Egypt, and go to sojourn there; 42:16 Then it
shall come to pass, that the sword, which ye feared, shall overtake
you there in the land of Egypt, and the famine, whereof ye were
afraid, shall follow close after you there in Egypt; and there ye
shall die.

42:17 So shall it be with all the men that set their faces to go into
Egypt to sojourn there; they shall die by the sword, by the famine,
and by the pestilence: and none of them shall remain or escape from
the evil that I will bring upon them.

42:18 For thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; As mine
anger and my fury hath been poured forth upon the inhabitants of
Jerusalem; so shall my fury be poured forth upon you, when ye shall
enter into Egypt: and ye shall be an execration, and an astonishment,
and a curse, and a reproach; and ye shall see this place no more.

42:19 The LORD hath said concerning you, O ye remnant of Judah; Go ye
not into Egypt: know certainly that I have admonished you this day.

42:20 For ye dissembled in your hearts, when ye sent me unto the LORD
your God, saying, Pray for us unto the LORD our God; and according
unto all that the LORD our God shall say, so declare unto us, and we
will do it.

42:21 And now I have this day declared it to you; but ye have not
obeyed the voice of the LORD your God, nor any thing for the which he
hath sent me unto you.

42:22 Now therefore know certainly that ye shall die by the sword, by
the famine, and by the pestilence, in the place whither ye desire to
go and to sojourn.

43:1 And it came to pass, that when Jeremiah had made an end of
speaking unto all the people all the words of the LORD their God, for
which the LORD their God had sent him to them, even all these words,
43:2 Then spake Azariah the son of Hoshaiah, and Johanan the son of
Kareah, and all the proud men, saying unto Jeremiah, Thou speakest
falsely: the LORD our God hath not sent thee to say, Go not into Egypt
to sojourn there: 43:3 But Baruch the son of Neriah setteth thee on
against us, for to deliver us into the hand of the Chaldeans, that
they might put us to death, and carry us away captives into Babylon.

43:4 So Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces,
and all the people, obeyed not the voice of the LORD, to dwell in the
land of Judah.

43:5 But Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the
forces, took all the remnant of Judah, that were returned from all
nations, whither they had been driven, to dwell in the land of Judah;
43:6 Even men, and women, and children, and the king's daughters, and
every person that Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard had left with
Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan, and Jeremiah the
prophet, and Baruch the son of Neriah.

43:7 So they came into the land of Egypt: for they obeyed not the
voice of the LORD: thus came they even to Tahpanhes.

43:8 Then came the word of the LORD unto Jeremiah in Tahpanhes,
saying, 43:9 Take great stones in thine hand, and hide them in the
clay in the brickkiln, which is at the entry of Pharaoh's house in
Tahpanhes, in the sight of the men of Judah; 43:10 And say unto them,
Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Behold, I will send
and take Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon, my servant, and will set
his throne upon these stones that I have hid; and he shall spread his
royal pavilion over them.

43:11 And when he cometh, he shall smite the land of Egypt, and
deliver such as are for death to death; and such as are for captivity
to captivity; and such as are for the sword to the sword.

43:12 And I will kindle a fire in the houses of the gods of Egypt; and
he shall burn them, and carry them away captives: and he shall array
himself with the land of Egypt, as a shepherd putteth on his garment;
and he shall go forth from thence in peace.

43:13 He shall break also the images of Bethshemesh, that is in the
land of Egypt; and the houses of the gods of the Egyptians shall he
burn with fire.

44:1 The word that came to Jeremiah concerning all the Jews which
dwell in the land of Egypt, which dwell at Migdol, and at Tahpanhes,
and at Noph, and in the country of Pathros, saying, 44:2 Thus saith
the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Ye have seen all the evil that I
have brought upon Jerusalem, and upon all the cities of Judah; and,
behold, this day they are a desolation, and no man dwelleth therein,
44:3 Because of their wickedness which they have committed to provoke
me to anger, in that they went to burn incense, and to serve other
gods, whom they knew not, neither they, ye, nor your fathers.

44:4 Howbeit I sent unto you all my servants the prophets, rising
early and sending them, saying, Oh, do not this abominable thing that
I hate.

44:5 But they hearkened not, nor inclined their ear to turn from their
wickedness, to burn no incense unto other gods.

44:6 Wherefore my fury and mine anger was poured forth, and was
kindled in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem; and
they are wasted and desolate, as at this day.

44:7 Therefore now thus saith the LORD, the God of hosts, the God of
Israel; Wherefore commit ye this great evil against your souls, to cut
off from you man and woman, child and suckling, out of Judah, to leave
you none to remain; 44:8 In that ye provoke me unto wrath with the
works of your hands, burning incense unto other gods in the land of
Egypt, whither ye be gone to dwell, that ye might cut yourselves off,
and that ye might be a curse and a reproach among all the nations of
the earth?  44:9 Have ye forgotten the wickedness of your fathers, and
the wickedness of the kings of Judah, and the wickedness of their
wives, and your own wickedness, and the wickedness of your wives,
which they have committed in the land of Judah, and in the streets of
Jerusalem?  44:10 They are not humbled even unto this day, neither
have they feared, nor walked in my law, nor in my statutes, that I set
before you and before your fathers.

44:11 Therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel;
Behold, I will set my face against you for evil, and to cut off all
Judah.

44:12 And I will take the remnant of Judah, that have set their faces
to go into the land of Egypt to sojourn there, and they shall all be
consumed, and fall in the land of Egypt; they shall even be consumed
by the sword and by the famine: they shall die, from the least even
unto the greatest, by the sword and by the famine: and they shall be
an execration, and an astonishment, and a curse, and a reproach.

44:13 For I will punish them that dwell in the land of Egypt, as I
have punished Jerusalem, by the sword, by the famine, and by the
pestilence: 44:14 So that none of the remnant of Judah, which are gone
into the land of Egypt to sojourn there, shall escape or remain, that
they should return into the land of Judah, to the which they have a
desire to return to dwell there: for none shall return but such as
shall escape.

44:15 Then all the men which knew that their wives had burned incense
unto other gods, and all the women that stood by, a great multitude,
even all the people that dwelt in the land of Egypt, in Pathros,
answered Jeremiah, saying, 44:16 As for the word that thou hast spoken
unto us in the name of the LORD, we will not hearken unto thee.

44:17 But we will certainly do whatsoever thing goeth forth out of our
own mouth, to burn incense unto the queen of heaven, and to pour out
drink offerings unto her, as we have done, we, and our fathers, our
kings, and our princes, in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of
Jerusalem: for then had we plenty of victuals, and were well, and saw
no evil.

44:18 But since we left off to burn incense to the queen of heaven,
and to pour out drink offerings unto her, we have wanted all things,
and have been consumed by the sword and by the famine.

44:19 And when we burned incense to the queen of heaven, and poured
out drink offerings unto her, did we make her cakes to worship her,
and pour out drink offerings unto her, without our men?  44:20 Then
Jeremiah said unto all the people, to the men, and to the women, and
to all the people which had given him that answer, saying, 44:21 The
incense that ye burned in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of
Jerusalem, ye, and your fathers, your kings, and your princes, and the
people of the land, did not the LORD remember them, and came it not
into his mind?  44:22 So that the LORD could no longer bear, because
of the evil of your doings, and because of the abominations which ye
have committed; therefore is your land a desolation, and an
astonishment, and a curse, without an inhabitant, as at this day.

44:23 Because ye have burned incense, and because ye have sinned
against the LORD, and have not obeyed the voice of the LORD, nor
walked in his law, nor in his statutes, nor in his testimonies;
therefore this evil is happened unto you, as at this day.

44:24 Moreover Jeremiah said unto all the people, and to all the
women, Hear the word of the LORD, all Judah that are in the land of
Egypt: 44:25 Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, saying;
Ye and your wives have both spoken with your mouths, and fulfilled
with your hand, saying, We will surely perform our vows that we have
vowed, to burn incense to the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink
offerings unto her: ye will surely accomplish your vows, and surely
perform your vows.

44:26 Therefore hear ye the word of the LORD, all Judah that dwell in
the land of Egypt; Behold, I have sworn by my great name, saith the
LORD, that my name shall no more be named in the mouth of any man of
Judah in all the land of Egypt, saying, The Lord GOD liveth.

44:27 Behold, I will watch over them for evil, and not for good: and
all the men of Judah that are in the land of Egypt shall be consumed
by the sword and by the famine, until there be an end of them.

44:28 Yet a small number that escape the sword shall return out of the
land of Egypt into the land of Judah, and all the remnant of Judah,
that are gone into the land of Egypt to sojourn there, shall know
whose words shall stand, mine, or their's.

44:29 And this shall be a sign unto you, saith the LORD, that I will
punish you in this place, that ye may know that my words shall surely
stand against you for evil: 44:30 Thus saith the LORD; Behold, I will
give Pharaohhophra king of Egypt into the hand of his enemies, and
into the hand of them that seek his life; as I gave Zedekiah king of
Judah into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, his enemy, and
that sought his life.

45:1 The word that Jeremiah the prophet spake unto Baruch the son of
Neriah, when he had written these words in a book at the mouth of
Jeremiah, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of
Judah, saying, 45:2 Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel, unto thee,
O Baruch: 45:3 Thou didst say, Woe is me now! for the LORD hath added
grief to my sorrow; I fainted in my sighing, and I find no rest.

45:4 Thus shalt thou say unto him, The LORD saith thus; Behold, that
which I have built will I break down, and that which I have planted I
will pluck up, even this whole land.

45:5 And seekest thou great things for thyself? seek them not: for,
behold, I will bring evil upon all flesh, saith the LORD: but thy life
will I give unto thee for a prey in all places whither thou goest.

46:1 The word of the LORD which came to Jeremiah the prophet against
the Gentiles; 46:2 Against Egypt, against the army of Pharaohnecho
king of Egypt, which was by the river Euphrates in Carchemish, which
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon smote in the fourth year of Jehoiakim
the son of Josiah king of Judah.

46:3 Order ye the buckler and shield, and draw near to battle.

46:4 Harness the horses; and get up, ye horsemen, and stand forth with
your helmets; furbish the spears, and put on the brigandines.

46:5 Wherefore have I seen them dismayed and turned away back? and
their mighty ones are beaten down, and are fled apace, and look not
back: for fear was round about, saith the LORD.

46:6 Let not the swift flee away, nor the mighty man escape; they
shall stumble, and fall toward the north by the river Euphrates.

46:7 Who is this that cometh up as a flood, whose waters are moved as
the rivers?  46:8 Egypt riseth up like a flood, and his waters are
moved like the rivers; and he saith, I will go up, and will cover the
earth; I will destroy the city and the inhabitants thereof.

46:9 Come up, ye horses; and rage, ye chariots; and let the mighty men
come forth; the Ethiopians and the Libyans, that handle the shield;
and the Lydians, that handle and bend the bow.

46:10 For this is the day of the Lord GOD of hosts, a day of
vengeance, that he may avenge him of his adversaries: and the sword
shall devour, and it shall be satiate and made drunk with their blood:
for the Lord GOD of hosts hath a sacrifice in the north country by the
river Euphrates.

46:11 Go up into Gilead, and take balm, O virgin, the daughter of
Egypt: in vain shalt thou use many medicines; for thou shalt not be
cured.

46:12 The nations have heard of thy shame, and thy cry hath filled the
land: for the mighty man hath stumbled against the mighty, and they
are fallen both together.

46:13 The word that the LORD spake to Jeremiah the prophet, how
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon should come and smite the land of
Egypt.

46:14 Declare ye in Egypt, and publish in Migdol, and publish in Noph
and in Tahpanhes: say ye, Stand fast, and prepare thee; for the sword
shall devour round about thee.

46:15 Why are thy valiant men swept away? they stood not, because the
LORD did drive them.

46:16 He made many to fall, yea, one fell upon another: and they said,
Arise, and let us go again to our own people, and to the land of our
nativity, from the oppressing sword.

46:17 They did cry there, Pharaoh king of Egypt is but a noise; he
hath passed the time appointed.

46:18 As I live, saith the King, whose name is the LORD of hosts,
Surely as Tabor is among the mountains, and as Carmel by the sea, so
shall he come.

46:19 O thou daughter dwelling in Egypt, furnish thyself to go into
captivity: for Noph shall be waste and desolate without an inhabitant.

46:20 Egypt is like a very fair heifer, but destruction cometh; it
cometh out of the north.

46:21 Also her hired men are in the midst of her like fatted bullocks;
for they also are turned back, and are fled away together: they did
not stand, because the day of their calamity was come upon them, and
the time of their visitation.

46:22 The voice thereof shall go like a serpent; for they shall march
with an army, and come against her with axes, as hewers of wood.

46:23 They shall cut down her forest, saith the LORD, though it cannot
be searched; because they are more than the grasshoppers, and are
innumerable.

46:24 The daughter of Egypt shall be confounded; she shall be
delivered into the hand of the people of the north.

46:25 The LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, saith; Behold, I will
punish the multitude of No, and Pharaoh, and Egypt, with their gods,
and their kings; even Pharaoh, and all them that trust in him: 46:26
And I will deliver them into the hand of those that seek their lives,
and into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and into the hand
of his servants: and afterward it shall be inhabited, as in the days
of old, saith the LORD.

46:27 But fear not thou, O my servant Jacob, and be not dismayed, O
Israel: for, behold, I will save thee from afar off, and thy seed from
the land of their captivity; and Jacob shall return, and be in rest
and at ease, and none shall make him afraid.

46:28 Fear thou not, O Jacob my servant, saith the LORD: for I am with
thee; for I will make a full end of all the nations whither I have
driven thee: but I will not make a full end of thee, but correct thee
in measure; yet will I not leave thee wholly unpunished.

47:1 The word of the LORD that came to Jeremiah the prophet against
the Philistines, before that Pharaoh smote Gaza.

47:2 Thus saith the LORD; Behold, waters rise up out of the north, and
shall be an overflowing flood, and shall overflow the land, and all
that is therein; the city, and them that dwell therein: then the men
shall cry, and all the inhabitants of the land shall howl.

47:3 At the noise of the stamping of the hoofs of his strong horses,
at the rushing of his chariots, and at the rumbling of his wheels, the
fathers shall not look back to their children for feebleness of hands;
47:4 Because of the day that cometh to spoil all the Philistines, and
to cut off from Tyrus and Zidon every helper that remaineth: for the
LORD will spoil the Philistines, the remnant of the country of
Caphtor.

47:5 Baldness is come upon Gaza; Ashkelon is cut off with the remnant
of their valley: how long wilt thou cut thyself?  47:6 O thou sword of
the LORD, how long will it be ere thou be quiet? put up thyself into
thy scabbard, rest, and be still.

47:7 How can it be quiet, seeing the LORD hath given it a charge
against Ashkelon, and against the sea shore? there hath he appointed
it.

48:1 Against Moab thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; Woe
unto Nebo! for it is spoiled: Kiriathaim is confounded and taken:
Misgab is confounded and dismayed.

48:2 There shall be no more praise of Moab: in Heshbon they have
devised evil against it; come, and let us cut it off from being a
nation. Also thou shalt be cut down, O Madmen; the sword shall pursue
thee.

48:3 A voice of crying shall be from Horonaim, spoiling and great
destruction.

48:4 Moab is destroyed; her little ones have caused a cry to be heard.

48:5 For in the going up of Luhith continual weeping shall go up; for
in the going down of Horonaim the enemies have heard a cry of
destruction.

48:6 Flee, save your lives, and be like the heath in the wilderness.

48:7 For because thou hast trusted in thy works and in thy treasures,
thou shalt also be taken: and Chemosh shall go forth into captivity
with his priests and his princes together.

48:8 And the spoiler shall come upon every city, and no city shall
escape: the valley also shall perish, and the plain shall be
destroyed, as the LORD hath spoken.

48:9 Give wings unto Moab, that it may flee and get away: for the
cities thereof shall be desolate, without any to dwell therein.

48:10 Cursed be he that doeth the work of the LORD deceitfully, and
cursed be he that keepeth back his sword from blood.

48:11 Moab hath been at ease from his youth, and he hath settled on
his lees, and hath not been emptied from vessel to vessel, neither
hath he gone into captivity: therefore his taste remained in him, and
his scent is not changed.

48:12 Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that I will
send unto him wanderers, that shall cause him to wander, and shall
empty his vessels, and break their bottles.

48:13 And Moab shall be ashamed of Chemosh, as the house of Israel was
ashamed of Bethel their confidence.

48:14 How say ye, We are mighty and strong men for the war?  48:15
Moab is spoiled, and gone up out of her cities, and his chosen young
men are gone down to the slaughter, saith the King, whose name is the
LORD of hosts.

48:16 The calamity of Moab is near to come, and his affliction hasteth
fast.

48:17 All ye that are about him, bemoan him; and all ye that know his
name, say, How is the strong staff broken, and the beautiful rod!
48:18 Thou daughter that dost inhabit Dibon, come down from thy glory,
and sit in thirst; for the spoiler of Moab shall come upon thee, and
he shall destroy thy strong holds.

48:19 O inhabitant of Aroer, stand by the way, and espy; ask him that
fleeth, and her that escapeth, and say, What is done?  48:20 Moab is
confounded; for it is broken down: howl and cry; tell ye it in Arnon,
that Moab is spoiled, 48:21 And judgment is come upon the plain
country; upon Holon, and upon Jahazah, and upon Mephaath, 48:22 And
upon Dibon, and upon Nebo, and upon Bethdiblathaim, 48:23 And upon
Kiriathaim, and upon Bethgamul, and upon Bethmeon, 48:24 And upon
Kerioth, and upon Bozrah, and upon all the cities of the land of Moab,
far or near.

48:25 The horn of Moab is cut off, and his arm is broken, saith the
LORD.

48:26 Make ye him drunken: for he magnified himself against the LORD:
Moab also shall wallow in his vomit, and he also shall be in derision.

48:27 For was not Israel a derision unto thee? was he found among
thieves?  for since thou spakest of him, thou skippedst for joy.

48:28 O ye that dwell in Moab, leave the cities, and dwell in the
rock, and be like the dove that maketh her nest in the sides of the
hole's mouth.

48:29 We have heard the pride of Moab, (he is exceeding proud) his
loftiness, and his arrogancy, and his pride, and the haughtiness of
his heart.

48:30 I know his wrath, saith the LORD; but it shall not be so; his
lies shall not so effect it.

48:31 Therefore will I howl for Moab, and I will cry out for all Moab;
mine heart shall mourn for the men of Kirheres.

48:32 O vine of Sibmah, I will weep for thee with the weeping of
Jazer: thy plants are gone over the sea, they reach even to the sea of
Jazer: the spoiler is fallen upon thy summer fruits and upon thy
vintage.

48:33 And joy and gladness is taken from the plentiful field, and from
the land of Moab, and I have caused wine to fail from the winepresses:
none shall tread with shouting; their shouting shall be no shouting.

48:34 From the cry of Heshbon even unto Elealeh, and even unto Jahaz,
have they uttered their voice, from Zoar even unto Horonaim, as an
heifer of three years old: for the waters also of Nimrim shall be
desolate.

48:35 Moreover I will cause to cease in Moab, saith the LORD, him that
offereth in the high places, and him that burneth incense to his gods.

48:36 Therefore mine heart shall sound for Moab like pipes, and mine
heart shall sound like pipes for the men of Kirheres: because the
riches that he hath gotten are perished.

48:37 For every head shall be bald, and every beard clipped: upon all
the hands shall be cuttings, and upon the loins sackcloth.

48:38 There shall be lamentation generally upon all the housetops of
Moab, and in the streets thereof: for I have broken Moab like a vessel
wherein is no pleasure, saith the LORD.

48:39 They shall howl, saying, How is it broken down! how hath Moab
turned the back with shame! so shall Moab be a derision and a
dismaying to all them about him.

48:40 For thus saith the LORD; Behold, he shall fly as an eagle, and
shall spread his wings over Moab.

48:41 Kerioth is taken, and the strong holds are surprised, and the
mighty men's hearts in Moab at that day shall be as the heart of a
woman in her pangs.

48:42 And Moab shall be destroyed from being a people, because he hath
magnified himself against the LORD.

48:43 Fear, and the pit, and the snare, shall be upon thee, O
inhabitant of Moab, saith the LORD.

48:44 He that fleeth from the fear shall fall into the pit; and he
that getteth up out of the pit shall be taken in the snare: for I will
bring upon it, even upon Moab, the year of their visitation, saith the
LORD.

48:45 They that fled stood under the shadow of Heshbon because of the
force: but a fire shall come forth out of Heshbon, and a flame from
the midst of Sihon, and shall devour the corner of Moab, and the crown
of the head of the tumultuous ones.

48:46 Woe be unto thee, O Moab! the people of Chemosh perisheth: for
thy sons are taken captives, and thy daughters captives.

48:47 Yet will I bring again the captivity of Moab in the latter days,
saith the LORD. Thus far is the judgment of Moab.

49:1 Concerning the Ammonites, thus saith the LORD; Hath Israel no
sons?  hath he no heir? why then doth their king inherit Gad, and his
people dwell in his cities?  49:2 Therefore, behold, the days come,
saith the LORD, that I will cause an alarm of war to be heard in
Rabbah of the Ammonites; and it shall be a desolate heap, and her
daughters shall be burned with fire: then shall Israel be heir unto
them that were his heirs, saith the LORD.

49:3 Howl, O Heshbon, for Ai is spoiled: cry, ye daughters of Rabbah,
gird you with sackcloth; lament, and run to and fro by the hedges; for
their king shall go into captivity, and his priests and his princes
together.

49:4 Wherefore gloriest thou in the valleys, thy flowing valley, O
backsliding daughter? that trusted in her treasures, saying, Who shall
come unto me?  49:5 Behold, I will bring a fear upon thee, saith the
Lord GOD of hosts, from all those that be about thee; and ye shall be
driven out every man right forth; and none shall gather up him that
wandereth.

49:6 And afterward I will bring again the captivity of the children of
Ammon, saith the LORD.

49:7 Concerning Edom, thus saith the LORD of hosts; Is wisdom no more
in Teman? is counsel perished from the prudent? is their wisdom
vanished?  49:8 Flee ye, turn back, dwell deep, O inhabitants of
Dedan; for I will bring the calamity of Esau upon him, the time that I
will visit him.

49:9 If grapegatherers come to thee, would they not leave some
gleaning grapes? if thieves by night, they will destroy till they have
enough.

49:10 But I have made Esau bare, I have uncovered his secret places,
and he shall not be able to hide himself: his seed is spoiled, and his
brethren, and his neighbours, and he is not.

49:11 Leave thy fatherless children, I will preserve them alive; and
let thy widows trust in me.

49:12 For thus saith the LORD; Behold, they whose judgment was not to
drink of the cup have assuredly drunken; and art thou he that shall
altogether go unpunished? thou shalt not go unpunished, but thou shalt
surely drink of it.

49:13 For I have sworn by myself, saith the LORD, that Bozrah shall
become a desolation, a reproach, a waste, and a curse; and all the
cities thereof shall be perpetual wastes.

49:14 I have heard a rumour from the LORD, and an ambassador is sent
unto the heathen, saying, Gather ye together, and come against her,
and rise up to the battle.

49:15 For, lo, I will make thee small among the heathen, and despised
among men.

49:16 Thy terribleness hath deceived thee, and the pride of thine
heart, O thou that dwellest in the clefts of the rock, that holdest
the height of the hill: though thou shouldest make thy nest as high as
the eagle, I will bring thee down from thence, saith the LORD.

49:17 Also Edom shall be a desolation: every one that goeth by it
shall be astonished, and shall hiss at all the plagues thereof.

49:18 As in the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah and the neighbour
cities thereof, saith the LORD, no man shall abide there, neither
shall a son of man dwell in it.

49:19 Behold, he shall come up like a lion from the swelling of Jordan
against the habitation of the strong: but I will suddenly make him run
away from her: and who is a chosen man, that I may appoint over her?
for who is like me? and who will appoint me the time? and who is that
shepherd that will stand before me?  49:20 Therefore hear the counsel
of the LORD, that he hath taken against Edom; and his purposes, that
he hath purposed against the inhabitants of Teman: Surely the least of
the flock shall draw them out: surely he shall make their habitations
desolate with them.

49:21 The earth is moved at the noise of their fall, at the cry the
noise thereof was heard in the Red sea.

49:22 Behold, he shall come up and fly as the eagle, and spread his
wings over Bozrah: and at that day shall the heart of the mighty men
of Edom be as the heart of a woman in her pangs.

49:23 Concerning Damascus. Hamath is confounded, and Arpad: for they
have heard evil tidings: they are fainthearted; there is sorrow on the
sea; it cannot be quiet.

49:24 Damascus is waxed feeble, and turneth herself to flee, and fear
hath seized on her: anguish and sorrows have taken her, as a woman in
travail.

49:25 How is the city of praise not left, the city of my joy!  49:26
Therefore her young men shall fall in her streets, and all the men of
war shall be cut off in that day, saith the LORD of hosts.

49:27 And I will kindle a fire in the wall of Damascus, and it shall
consume the palaces of Benhadad.

49:28 Concerning Kedar, and concerning the kingdoms of Hazor, which
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon shall smite, thus saith the LORD; Arise
ye, go up to Kedar, and spoil the men of the east.

49:29 Their tents and their flocks shall they take away: they shall
take to themselves their curtains, and all their vessels, and their
camels; and they shall cry unto them, Fear is on every side.

49:30 Flee, get you far off, dwell deep, O ye inhabitants of Hazor,
saith the LORD; for Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon hath taken counsel
against you, and hath conceived a purpose against you.

49:31 Arise, get you up unto the wealthy nation, that dwelleth without
care, saith the LORD, which have neither gates nor bars, which dwell
alone.

49:32 And their camels shall be a booty, and the multitude of their
cattle a spoil: and I will scatter into all winds them that are in the
utmost corners; and I will bring their calamity from all sides
thereof, saith the LORD.

49:33 And Hazor shall be a dwelling for dragons, and a desolation for
ever: there shall no man abide there, nor any son of man dwell in it.

49:34 The word of the LORD that came to Jeremiah the prophet against
Elam in the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah king of Judah, saying,
49:35 Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Behold, I will break the bow of
Elam, the chief of their might.

49:36 And upon Elam will I bring the four winds from the four quarters
of heaven, and will scatter them toward all those winds; and there
shall be no nation whither the outcasts of Elam shall not come.

49:37 For I will cause Elam to be dismayed before their enemies, and
before them that seek their life: and I will bring evil upon them,
even my fierce anger, saith the LORD; and I will send the sword after
them, till I have consumed them: 49:38 And I will set my throne in
Elam, and will destroy from thence the king and the princes, saith the
LORD.

49:39 But it shall come to pass in the latter days, that I will bring
again the captivity of Elam, saith the LORD.

50:1 The word that the LORD spake against Babylon and against the land
of the Chaldeans by Jeremiah the prophet.

50:2 Declare ye among the nations, and publish, and set up a standard;
publish, and conceal not: say, Babylon is taken, Bel is confounded,
Merodach is broken in pieces; her idols are confounded, her images are
broken in pieces.

50:3 For out of the north there cometh up a nation against her, which
shall make her land desolate, and none shall dwell therein: they shall
remove, they shall depart, both man and beast.

50:4 In those days, and in that time, saith the LORD, the children of
Israel shall come, they and the children of Judah together, going and
weeping: they shall go, and seek the LORD their God.

50:5 They shall ask the way to Zion with their faces thitherward,
saying, Come, and let us join ourselves to the LORD in a perpetual
covenant that shall not be forgotten.

50:6 My people hath been lost sheep: their shepherds have caused them
to go astray, they have turned them away on the mountains: they have
gone from mountain to hill, they have forgotten their restingplace.

50:7 All that found them have devoured them: and their adversaries
said, We offend not, because they have sinned against the LORD, the
habitation of justice, even the LORD, the hope of their fathers.

50:8 Remove out of the midst of Babylon, and go forth out of the land
of the Chaldeans, and be as the he goats before the flocks.

50:9 For, lo, I will raise and cause to come up against Babylon an
assembly of great nations from the north country: and they shall set
themselves in array against her; from thence she shall be taken: their
arrows shall be as of a mighty expert man; none shall return in vain.

50:10 And Chaldea shall be a spoil: all that spoil her shall be
satisfied, saith the LORD.

50:11 Because ye were glad, because ye rejoiced, O ye destroyers of
mine heritage, because ye are grown fat as the heifer at grass, and
bellow as bulls; 50:12 Your mother shall be sore confounded; she that
bare you shall be ashamed: behold, the hindermost of the nations shall
be a wilderness, a dry land, and a desert.

50:13 Because of the wrath of the LORD it shall not be inhabited, but
it shall be wholly desolate: every one that goeth by Babylon shall be
astonished, and hiss at all her plagues.

50:14 Put yourselves in array against Babylon round about: all ye that
bend the bow, shoot at her, spare no arrows: for she hath sinned
against the LORD.

50:15 Shout against her round about: she hath given her hand: her
foundations are fallen, her walls are thrown down: for it is the
vengeance of the LORD: take vengeance upon her; as she hath done, do
unto her.

50:16 Cut off the sower from Babylon, and him that handleth the sickle
in the time of harvest: for fear of the oppressing sword they shall
turn every one to his people, and they shall flee every one to his own
land.

50:17 Israel is a scattered sheep; the lions have driven him away:
first the king of Assyria hath devoured him; and last this
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon hath broken his bones.

50:18 Therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel;
Behold, I will punish the king of Babylon and his land, as I have
punished the king of Assyria.

50:19 And I will bring Israel again to his habitation, and he shall
feed on Carmel and Bashan, and his soul shall be satisfied upon mount
Ephraim and Gilead.

50:20 In those days, and in that time, saith the LORD, the iniquity of
Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none; and the sins of
Judah, and they shall not be found: for I will pardon them whom I
reserve.

50:21 Go up against the land of Merathaim, even against it, and
against the inhabitants of Pekod: waste and utterly destroy after
them, saith the LORD, and do according to all that I have commanded
thee.

50:22 A sound of battle is in the land, and of great destruction.

50:23 How is the hammer of the whole earth cut asunder and broken! how
is Babylon become a desolation among the nations!  50:24 I have laid a
snare for thee, and thou art also taken, O Babylon, and thou wast not
aware: thou art found, and also caught, because thou hast striven
against the LORD.

50:25 The LORD hath opened his armoury, and hath brought forth the
weapons of his indignation: for this is the work of the Lord GOD of
hosts in the land of the Chaldeans.

50:26 Come against her from the utmost border, open her storehouses:
cast her up as heaps, and destroy her utterly: let nothing of her be
left.

50:27 Slay all her bullocks; let them go down to the slaughter: woe
unto them! for their day is come, the time of their visitation.

50:28 The voice of them that flee and escape out of the land of
Babylon, to declare in Zion the vengeance of the LORD our God, the
vengeance of his temple.

50:29 Call together the archers against Babylon: all ye that bend the
bow, camp against it round about; let none thereof escape: recompense
her according to her work; according to all that she hath done, do
unto her: for she hath been proud against the LORD, against the Holy
One of Israel.

50:30 Therefore shall her young men fall in the streets, and all her
men of war shall be cut off in that day, saith the LORD.

50:31 Behold, I am against thee, O thou most proud, saith the Lord GOD
of hosts: for thy day is come, the time that I will visit thee.

50:32 And the most proud shall stumble and fall, and none shall raise
him up: and I will kindle a fire in his cities, and it shall devour
all round about him.

50:33 Thus saith the LORD of hosts; The children of Israel and the
children of Judah were oppressed together: and all that took them
captives held them fast; they refused to let them go.

50:34 Their Redeemer is strong; the LORD of hosts is his name: he
shall throughly plead their cause, that he may give rest to the land,
and disquiet the inhabitants of Babylon.

50:35 A sword is upon the Chaldeans, saith the LORD, and upon the
inhabitants of Babylon, and upon her princes, and upon her wise men.

50:36 A sword is upon the liars; and they shall dote: a sword is upon
her mighty men; and they shall be dismayed.

50:37 A sword is upon their horses, and upon their chariots, and upon
all the mingled people that are in the midst of her; and they shall
become as women: a sword is upon her treasures; and they shall be
robbed.

50:38 A drought is upon her waters; and they shall be dried up: for it
is the land of graven images, and they are mad upon their idols.

50:39 Therefore the wild beasts of the desert with the wild beasts of
the islands shall dwell there, and the owls shall dwell therein: and
it shall be no more inhabited for ever; neither shall it be dwelt in
from generation to generation.

50:40 As God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah and the neighbour cities
thereof, saith the LORD; so shall no man abide there, neither shall
any son of man dwell therein.

50:41 Behold, a people shall come from the north, and a great nation,
and many kings shall be raised up from the coasts of the earth.

50:42 They shall hold the bow and the lance: they are cruel, and will
not shew mercy: their voice shall roar like the sea, and they shall
ride upon horses, every one put in array, like a man to the battle,
against thee, O daughter of Babylon.

50:43 The king of Babylon hath heard the report of them, and his hands
waxed feeble: anguish took hold of him, and pangs as of a woman in
travail.

50:44 Behold, he shall come up like a lion from the swelling of Jordan
unto the habitation of the strong: but I will make them suddenly run
away from her: and who is a chosen man, that I may appoint over her?
for who is like me? and who will appoint me the time? and who is that
shepherd that will stand before me?  50:45 Therefore hear ye the
counsel of the LORD, that he hath taken against Babylon; and his
purposes, that he hath purposed against the land of the Chaldeans:
Surely the least of the flock shall draw them out: surely he shall
make their habitation desolate with them.

50:46 At the noise of the taking of Babylon the earth is moved, and
the cry is heard among the nations.

51:1 Thus saith the LORD; Behold, I will raise up against Babylon, and
against them that dwell in the midst of them that rise up against me,
a destroying wind; 51:2 And will send unto Babylon fanners, that shall
fan her, and shall empty her land: for in the day of trouble they
shall be against her round about.

51:3 Against him that bendeth let the archer bend his bow, and against
him that lifteth himself up in his brigandine: and spare ye not her
young men; destroy ye utterly all her host.

51:4 Thus the slain shall fall in the land of the Chaldeans, and they
that are thrust through in her streets.

51:5 For Israel hath not been forsaken, nor Judah of his God, of the
LORD of hosts; though their land was filled with sin against the Holy
One of Israel.

51:6 Flee out of the midst of Babylon, and deliver every man his soul:
be not cut off in her iniquity; for this is the time of the LORD's
vengeance; he will render unto her a recompence.

51:7 Babylon hath been a golden cup in the LORD's hand, that made all
the earth drunken: the nations have drunken of her wine; therefore the
nations are mad.

51:8 Babylon is suddenly fallen and destroyed: howl for her; take balm
for her pain, if so be she may be healed.

51:9 We would have healed Babylon, but she is not healed: forsake her,
and let us go every one into his own country: for her judgment
reacheth unto heaven, and is lifted up even to the skies.

51:10 The LORD hath brought forth our righteousness: come, and let us
declare in Zion the work of the LORD our God.

51:11 Make bright the arrows; gather the shields: the LORD hath raised
up the spirit of the kings of the Medes: for his device is against
Babylon, to destroy it; because it is the vengeance of the LORD, the
vengeance of his temple.

51:12 Set up the standard upon the walls of Babylon, make the watch
strong, set up the watchmen, prepare the ambushes: for the LORD hath
both devised and done that which he spake against the inhabitants of
Babylon.

51:13 O thou that dwellest upon many waters, abundant in treasures,
thine end is come, and the measure of thy covetousness.

51:14 The LORD of hosts hath sworn by himself, saying, Surely I will
fill thee with men, as with caterpillers; and they shall lift up a
shout against thee.

51:15 He hath made the earth by his power, he hath established the
world by his wisdom, and hath stretched out the heaven by his
understanding.

51:16 When he uttereth his voice, there is a multitude of waters in
the heavens; and he causeth the vapours to ascend from the ends of the
earth: he maketh lightnings with rain, and bringeth forth the wind out
of his treasures.

51:17 Every man is brutish by his knowledge; every founder is
confounded by the graven image: for his molten image is falsehood, and
there is no breath in them.

51:18 They are vanity, the work of errors: in the time of their
visitation they shall perish.

51:19 The portion of Jacob is not like them; for he is the former of
all things: and Israel is the rod of his inheritance: the LORD of
hosts is his name.

51:20 Thou art my battle axe and weapons of war: for with thee will I
break in pieces the nations, and with thee will I destroy kingdoms;
51:21 And with thee will I break in pieces the horse and his rider;
and with thee will I break in pieces the chariot and his rider; 51:22
With thee also will I break in pieces man and woman; and with thee
will I break in pieces old and young; and with thee will I break in
pieces the young man and the maid; 51:23 I will also break in pieces
with thee the shepherd and his flock; and with thee will I break in
pieces the husbandman and his yoke of oxen; and with thee will I break
in pieces captains and rulers.

51:24 And I will render unto Babylon and to all the inhabitants of
Chaldea all their evil that they have done in Zion in your sight,
saith the LORD.

51:25 Behold, I am against thee, O destroying mountain, saith the
LORD, which destroyest all the earth: and I will stretch out mine hand
upon thee, and roll thee down from the rocks, and will make thee a
burnt mountain.

51:26 And they shall not take of thee a stone for a corner, nor a
stone for foundations; but thou shalt be desolate for ever, saith the
LORD.

51:27 Set ye up a standard in the land, blow the trumpet among the
nations, prepare the nations against her, call together against her
the kingdoms of Ararat, Minni, and Ashchenaz; appoint a captain
against her; cause the horses to come up as the rough caterpillers.

51:28 Prepare against her the nations with the kings of the Medes, the
captains thereof, and all the rulers thereof, and all the land of his
dominion.

51:29 And the land shall tremble and sorrow: for every purpose of the
LORD shall be performed against Babylon, to make the land of Babylon a
desolation without an inhabitant.

51:30 The mighty men of Babylon have forborn to fight, they have
remained in their holds: their might hath failed; they became as
women: they have burned her dwellingplaces; her bars are broken.

51:31 One post shall run to meet another, and one messenger to meet
another, to shew the king of Babylon that his city is taken at one
end, 51:32 And that the passages are stopped, and the reeds they have
burned with fire, and the men of war are affrighted.

51:33 For thus saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel; The
daughter of Babylon is like a threshingfloor, it is time to thresh
her: yet a little while, and the time of her harvest shall come.

51:34 Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon hath devoured me, he hath
crushed me, he hath made me an empty vessel, he hath swallowed me up
like a dragon, he hath filled his belly with my delicates, he hath
cast me out.

51:35 The violence done to me and to my flesh be upon Babylon, shall
the inhabitant of Zion say; and my blood upon the inhabitants of
Chaldea, shall Jerusalem say.

51:36 Therefore thus saith the LORD; Behold, I will plead thy cause,
and take vengeance for thee; and I will dry up her sea, and make her
springs dry.

51:37 And Babylon shall become heaps, a dwellingplace for dragons, an
astonishment, and an hissing, without an inhabitant.

51:38 They shall roar together like lions: they shall yell as lions'
whelps.

51:39 In their heat I will make their feasts, and I will make them
drunken, that they may rejoice, and sleep a perpetual sleep, and not
wake, saith the LORD.

51:40 I will bring them down like lambs to the slaughter, like rams
with he goats.

51:41 How is Sheshach taken! and how is the praise of the whole earth
surprised! how is Babylon become an astonishment among the nations!
51:42 The sea is come up upon Babylon: she is covered with the
multitude of the waves thereof.

51:43 Her cities are a desolation, a dry land, and a wilderness, a
land wherein no man dwelleth, neither doth any son of man pass
thereby.

51:44 And I will punish Bel in Babylon, and I will bring forth out of
his mouth that which he hath swallowed up: and the nations shall not
flow together any more unto him: yea, the wall of Babylon shall fall.

51:45 My people, go ye out of the midst of her, and deliver ye every
man his soul from the fierce anger of the LORD.

51:46 And lest your heart faint, and ye fear for the rumour that shall
be heard in the land; a rumour shall both come one year, and after
that in another year shall come a rumour, and violence in the land,
ruler against ruler.

51:47 Therefore, behold, the days come, that I will do judgment upon
the graven images of Babylon: and her whole land shall be confounded,
and all her slain shall fall in the midst of her.

51:48 Then the heaven and the earth, and all that is therein, shall
sing for Babylon: for the spoilers shall come unto her from the north,
saith the LORD.

51:49 As Babylon hath caused the slain of Israel to fall, so at
Babylon shall fall the slain of all the earth.

51:50 Ye that have escaped the sword, go away, stand not still:
remember the LORD afar off, and let Jerusalem come into your mind.

51:51 We are confounded, because we have heard reproach: shame hath
covered our faces: for strangers are come into the sanctuaries of the
LORD's house.

51:52 Wherefore, behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that I will do
judgment upon her graven images: and through all her land the wounded
shall groan.

51:53 Though Babylon should mount up to heaven, and though she should
fortify the height of her strength, yet from me shall spoilers come
unto her, saith the LORD.

51:54 A sound of a cry cometh from Babylon, and great destruction from
the land of the Chaldeans: 51:55 Because the LORD hath spoiled
Babylon, and destroyed out of her the great voice; when her waves do
roar like great waters, a noise of their voice is uttered: 51:56
Because the spoiler is come upon her, even upon Babylon, and her
mighty men are taken, every one of their bows is broken: for the LORD
God of recompences shall surely requite.

51:57 And I will make drunk her princes, and her wise men, her
captains, and her rulers, and her mighty men: and they shall sleep a
perpetual sleep, and not wake, saith the King, whose name is the LORD
of hosts.

51:58 Thus saith the LORD of hosts; The broad walls of Babylon shall
be utterly broken, and her high gates shall be burned with fire; and
the people shall labour in vain, and the folk in the fire, and they
shall be weary.

51:59 The word which Jeremiah the prophet commanded Seraiah the son of
Neriah, the son of Maaseiah, when he went with Zedekiah the king of
Judah into Babylon in the fourth year of his reign. And this Seraiah
was a quiet prince.

51:60 So Jeremiah wrote in a book all the evil that should come upon
Babylon, even all these words that are written against Babylon.

51:61 And Jeremiah said to Seraiah, When thou comest to Babylon, and
shalt see, and shalt read all these words; 51:62 Then shalt thou say,
O LORD, thou hast spoken against this place, to cut it off, that none
shall remain in it, neither man nor beast, but that it shall be
desolate for ever.

51:63 And it shall be, when thou hast made an end of reading this
book, that thou shalt bind a stone to it, and cast it into the midst
of Euphrates: 51:64 And thou shalt say, Thus shall Babylon sink, and
shall not rise from the evil that I will bring upon her: and they
shall be weary. Thus far are the words of Jeremiah.

52:1 Zedekiah was one and twenty years old when he began to reign, and
he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was
Hamutal the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.

52:2 And he did that which was evil in the eyes of the LORD, according
to all that Jehoiakim had done.

52:3 For through the anger of the LORD it came to pass in Jerusalem
and Judah, till he had cast them out from his presence, that Zedekiah
rebelled against the king of Babylon.

52:4 And it came to pass in the ninth year of his reign, in the tenth
month, in the tenth day of the month, that Nebuchadrezzar king of
Babylon came, he and all his army, against Jerusalem, and pitched
against it, and built forts against it round about.

52:5 So the city was besieged unto the eleventh year of king Zedekiah.

52:6 And in the fourth month, in the ninth day of the month, the
famine was sore in the city, so that there was no bread for the people
of the land.

52:7 Then the city was broken up, and all the men of war fled, and
went forth out of the city by night by the way of the gate between the
two walls, which was by the king's garden; (now the Chaldeans were by
the city round about:) and they went by the way of the plain.

52:8 But the army of the Chaldeans pursued after the king, and
overtook Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho; and all his army was
scattered from him.

52:9 Then they took the king, and carried him up unto the king of
Babylon to Riblah in the land of Hamath; where he gave judgment upon
him.

52:10 And the king of Babylon slew the sons of Zedekiah before his
eyes: he slew also all the princes of Judah in Riblah.

52:11 Then he put out the eyes of Zedekiah; and the king of Babylon
bound him in chains, and carried him to Babylon, and put him in prison
till the day of his death.

52:12 Now in the fifth month, in the tenth day of the month, which was
the nineteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, came
Nebuzaradan, captain of the guard, which served the king of Babylon,
into Jerusalem, 52:13 And burned the house of the LORD, and the king's
house; and all the houses of Jerusalem, and all the houses of the
great men, burned he with fire: 52:14 And all the army of the
Chaldeans, that were with the captain of the guard, brake down all the
walls of Jerusalem round about.

52:15 Then Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carried away captive
certain of the poor of the people, and the residue of the people that
remained in the city, and those that fell away, that fell to the king
of Babylon, and the rest of the multitude.

52:16 But Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard left certain of the
poor of the land for vinedressers and for husbandmen.

52:17 Also the pillars of brass that were in the house of the LORD,
and the bases, and the brasen sea that was in the house of the LORD,
the Chaldeans brake, and carried all the brass of them to Babylon.

52:18 The caldrons also, and the shovels, and the snuffers, and the
bowls, and the spoons, and all the vessels of brass wherewith they
ministered, took they away.

52:19 And the basons, and the firepans, and the bowls, and the
caldrons, and the candlesticks, and the spoons, and the cups; that
which was of gold in gold, and that which was of silver in silver,
took the captain of the guard away.

52:20 The two pillars, one sea, and twelve brasen bulls that were
under the bases, which king Solomon had made in the house of the LORD:
the brass of all these vessels was without weight.

52:21 And concerning the pillars, the height of one pillar was
eighteen cubits; and a fillet of twelve cubits did compass it; and the
thickness thereof was four fingers: it was hollow.

52:22 And a chapiter of brass was upon it; and the height of one
chapiter was five cubits, with network and pomegranates upon the
chapiters round about, all of brass. The second pillar also and the
pomegranates were like unto these.

52:23 And there were ninety and six pomegranates on a side; and all
the pomegranates upon the network were an hundred round about.

52:24 And the captain of the guard took Seraiah the chief priest, and
Zephaniah the second priest, and the three keepers of the door: 52:25
He took also out of the city an eunuch, which had the charge of the
men of war; and seven men of them that were near the king's person,
which were found in the city; and the principal scribe of the host,
who mustered the people of the land; and threescore men of the people
of the land, that were found in the midst of the city.

52:26 So Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard took them, and brought
them to the king of Babylon to Riblah.

52:27 And the king of Babylon smote them, and put them to death in
Riblah in the land of Hamath. Thus Judah was carried away captive out
of his own land.

52:28 This is the people whom Nebuchadrezzar carried away captive: in
the seventh year three thousand Jews and three and twenty: 52:29 In
the eighteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar he carried away captive from
Jerusalem eight hundred thirty and two persons: 52:30 In the three and
twentieth year of Nebuchadrezzar Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard
carried away captive of the Jews seven hundred forty and five persons:
all the persons were four thousand and six hundred.

52:31 And it came to pass in the seven and thirtieth year of the
captivity of Jehoiachin king of Judah, in the twelfth month, in the
five and twentieth day of the month, that Evilmerodach king of Babylon
in the first year of his reign lifted up the head of Jehoiachin king
of Judah, and brought him forth out of prison.

52:32 And spake kindly unto him, and set his throne above the throne
of the kings that were with him in Babylon, 52:33 And changed his
prison garments: and he did continually eat bread before him all the
days of his life.

52:34 And for his diet, there was a continual diet given him of the
king of Babylon, every day a portion until the day of his death, all
the days of his life.




The Lamentations of Jeremiah


1:1 How doth the city sit solitary, that was full of people! how is
she become as a widow! she that was great among the nations, and
princess among the provinces, how is she become tributary!  1:2 She
weepeth sore in the night, and her tears are on her cheeks: among all
her lovers she hath none to comfort her: all her friends have dealt
treacherously with her, they are become her enemies.

1:3 Judah is gone into captivity because of affliction, and because of
great servitude: she dwelleth among the heathen, she findeth no rest:
all her persecutors overtook her between the straits.

1:4 The ways of Zion do mourn, because none come to the solemn feasts:
all her gates are desolate: her priests sigh, her virgins are
afflicted, and she is in bitterness.

1:5 Her adversaries are the chief, her enemies prosper; for the LORD
hath afflicted her for the multitude of her transgressions: her
children are gone into captivity before the enemy.

1:6 And from the daughter of Zion all her beauty is departed: her
princes are become like harts that find no pasture, and they are gone
without strength before the pursuer.

1:7 Jerusalem remembered in the days of her affliction and of her
miseries all her pleasant things that she had in the days of old, when
her people fell into the hand of the enemy, and none did help her: the
adversaries saw her, and did mock at her sabbaths.

1:8 Jerusalem hath grievously sinned; therefore she is removed: all
that honoured her despise her, because they have seen her nakedness:
yea, she sigheth, and turneth backward.

1:9 Her filthiness is in her skirts; she remembereth not her last end;
therefore she came down wonderfully: she had no comforter. O LORD,
behold my affliction: for the enemy hath magnified himself.

1:10 The adversary hath spread out his hand upon all her pleasant
things: for she hath seen that the heathen entered into her sanctuary,
whom thou didst command that they should not enter into thy
congregation.

1:11 All her people sigh, they seek bread; they have given their
pleasant things for meat to relieve the soul: see, O LORD, and
consider; for I am become vile.

1:12 Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by? behold, and see if
there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me,
wherewith the LORD hath afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger.

1:13 From above hath he sent fire into my bones, and it prevaileth
against them: he hath spread a net for my feet, he hath turned me
back: he hath made me desolate and faint all the day.

1:14 The yoke of my transgressions is bound by his hand: they are
wreathed, and come up upon my neck: he hath made my strength to fall,
the LORD hath delivered me into their hands, from whom I am not able
to rise up.

1:15 The LORD hath trodden under foot all my mighty men in the midst
of me: he hath called an assembly against me to crush my young men:
the LORD hath trodden the virgin, the daughter of Judah, as in a
winepress.

1:16 For these things I weep; mine eye, mine eye runneth down with
water, because the comforter that should relieve my soul is far from
me: my children are desolate, because the enemy prevailed.

1:17 Zion spreadeth forth her hands, and there is none to comfort her:
the LORD hath commanded concerning Jacob, that his adversaries should
be round about him: Jerusalem is as a menstruous woman among them.

1:18 The LORD is righteous; for I have rebelled against his
commandment: hear, I pray you, all people, and behold my sorrow: my
virgins and my young men are gone into captivity.

1:19 I called for my lovers, but they deceived me: my priests and mine
elders gave up the ghost in the city, while they sought their meat to
relieve their souls.

1:20 Behold, O LORD; for I am in distress: my bowels are troubled;
mine heart is turned within me; for I have grievously rebelled: abroad
the sword bereaveth, at home there is as death.

1:21 They have heard that I sigh: there is none to comfort me: all
mine enemies have heard of my trouble; they are glad that thou hast
done it: thou wilt bring the day that thou hast called, and they shall
be like unto me.

1:22 Let all their wickedness come before thee; and do unto them, as
thou hast done unto me for all my transgressions: for my sighs are
many, and my heart is faint.

2:1 How hath the LORD covered the daughter of Zion with a cloud in his
anger, and cast down from heaven unto the earth the beauty of Israel,
and remembered not his footstool in the day of his anger!  2:2 The
LORD hath swallowed up all the habitations of Jacob, and hath not
pitied: he hath thrown down in his wrath the strong holds of the
daughter of Judah; he hath brought them down to the ground: he hath
polluted the kingdom and the princes thereof.

2:3 He hath cut off in his fierce anger all the horn of Israel: he
hath drawn back his right hand from before the enemy, and he burned
against Jacob like a flaming fire, which devoureth round about.

2:4 He hath bent his bow like an enemy: he stood with his right hand
as an adversary, and slew all that were pleasant to the eye in the
tabernacle of the daughter of Zion: he poured out his fury like fire.

2:5 The LORD was as an enemy: he hath swallowed up Israel, he hath
swallowed up all her palaces: he hath destroyed his strong holds, and
hath increased in the daughter of Judah mourning and lamentation.

2:6 And he hath violently taken away his tabernacle, as if it were of
a garden: he hath destroyed his places of the assembly: the LORD hath
caused the solemn feasts and sabbaths to be forgotten in Zion, and
hath despised in the indignation of his anger the king and the priest.

2:7 The LORD hath cast off his altar, he hath abhorred his sanctuary,
he hath given up into the hand of the enemy the walls of her palaces;
they have made a noise in the house of the LORD, as in the day of a
solemn feast.

2:8 The LORD hath purposed to destroy the wall of the daughter of
Zion: he hath stretched out a line, he hath not withdrawn his hand
from destroying: therefore he made the rampart and the wall to lament;
they languished together.

2:9 Her gates are sunk into the ground; he hath destroyed and broken
her bars: her king and her princes are among the Gentiles: the law is
no more; her prophets also find no vision from the LORD.

2:10 The elders of the daughter of Zion sit upon the ground, and keep
silence: they have cast up dust upon their heads; they have girded
themselves with sackcloth: the virgins of Jerusalem hang down their
heads to the ground.

2:11 Mine eyes do fail with tears, my bowels are troubled, my liver is
poured upon the earth, for the destruction of the daughter of my
people; because the children and the sucklings swoon in the streets of
the city.

2:12 They say to their mothers, Where is corn and wine? when they
swooned as the wounded in the streets of the city, when their soul was
poured out into their mothers' bosom.

2:13 What thing shall I take to witness for thee? what thing shall I
liken to thee, O daughter of Jerusalem? what shall I equal to thee,
that I may comfort thee, O virgin daughter of Zion? for thy breach is
great like the sea: who can heal thee?  2:14 Thy prophets have seen
vain and foolish things for thee: and they have not discovered thine
iniquity, to turn away thy captivity; but have seen for thee false
burdens and causes of banishment.

2:15 All that pass by clap their hands at thee; they hiss and wag
their head at the daughter of Jerusalem, saying, Is this the city that
men call The perfection of beauty, The joy of the whole earth?  2:16
All thine enemies have opened their mouth against thee: they hiss and
gnash the teeth: they say, We have swallowed her up: certainly this is
the day that we looked for; we have found, we have seen it.

2:17 The LORD hath done that which he had devised; he hath fulfilled
his word that he had commanded in the days of old: he hath thrown
down, and hath not pitied: and he hath caused thine enemy to rejoice
over thee, he hath set up the horn of thine adversaries.

2:18 Their heart cried unto the LORD, O wall of the daughter of Zion,
let tears run down like a river day and night: give thyself no rest;
let not the apple of thine eye cease.

2:19 Arise, cry out in the night: in the beginning of the watches pour
out thine heart like water before the face of the LORD: lift up thy
hands toward him for the life of thy young children, that faint for
hunger in the top of every street.

2:20 Behold, O LORD, and consider to whom thou hast done this. Shall
the women eat their fruit, and children of a span long? shall the
priest and the prophet be slain in the sanctuary of the Lord?  2:21
The young and the old lie on the ground in the streets: my virgins and
my young men are fallen by the sword; thou hast slain them in the day
of thine anger; thou hast killed, and not pitied.

2:22 Thou hast called as in a solemn day my terrors round about, so
that in the day of the LORD's anger none escaped nor remained: those
that I have swaddled and brought up hath mine enemy consumed.

3:1 I AM the man that hath seen affliction by the rod of his wrath.

3:2 He hath led me, and brought me into darkness, but not into light.

3:3 Surely against me is he turned; he turneth his hand against me all
the day.

3:4 My flesh and my skin hath he made old; he hath broken my bones.

3:5 He hath builded against me, and compassed me with gall and
travail.

3:6 He hath set me in dark places, as they that be dead of old.

3:7 He hath hedged me about, that I cannot get out: he hath made my
chain heavy.

3:8 Also when I cry and shout, he shutteth out my prayer.

3:9 He hath inclosed my ways with hewn stone, he hath made my paths
crooked.

3:10 He was unto me as a bear lying in wait, and as a lion in secret
places.

3:11 He hath turned aside my ways, and pulled me in pieces: he hath
made me desolate.

3:12 He hath bent his bow, and set me as a mark for the arrow.

3:13 He hath caused the arrows of his quiver to enter into my reins.

3:14 I was a derision to all my people; and their song all the day.

3:15 He hath filled me with bitterness, he hath made me drunken with
wormwood.

3:16 He hath also broken my teeth with gravel stones, he hath covered
me with ashes.

3:17 And thou hast removed my soul far off from peace: I forgat
prosperity.

3:18 And I said, My strength and my hope is perished from the LORD:
3:19 Remembering mine affliction and my misery, the wormwood and the
gall.

3:20 My soul hath them still in remembrance, and is humbled in me.

3:21 This I recall to my mind, therefore have I hope.

3:22 It is of the LORD's mercies that we are not consumed, because his
compassions fail not.

3:23 They are new every morning: great is thy faithfulness.

3:24 The LORD is my portion, saith my soul; therefore will I hope in
him.

3:25 The LORD is good unto them that wait for him, to the soul that
seeketh him.

3:26 It is good that a man should both hope and quietly wait for the
salvation of the LORD.

3:27 It is good for a man that he bear the yoke of his youth.

3:28 He sitteth alone and keepeth silence, because he hath borne it
upon him.

3:29 He putteth his mouth in the dust; if so be there may be hope.

3:30 He giveth his cheek to him that smiteth him: he is filled full
with reproach.

3:31 For the LORD will not cast off for ever: 3:32 But though he cause
grief, yet will he have compassion according to the multitude of his
mercies.

3:33 For he doth not afflict willingly nor grieve the children of men.

3:34 To crush under his feet all the prisoners of the earth.

3:35 To turn aside the right of a man before the face of the most
High, 3:36 To subvert a man in his cause, the LORD approveth not.

3:37 Who is he that saith, and it cometh to pass, when the Lord
commandeth it not?  3:38 Out of the mouth of the most High proceedeth
not evil and good?  3:39 Wherefore doth a living man complain, a man
for the punishment of his sins?  3:40 Let us search and try our ways,
and turn again to the LORD.

3:41 Let us lift up our heart with our hands unto God in the heavens.

3:42 We have transgressed and have rebelled: thou hast not pardoned.

3:43 Thou hast covered with anger, and persecuted us: thou hast slain,
thou hast not pitied.

3:44 Thou hast covered thyself with a cloud, that our prayer should
not pass through.

3:45 Thou hast made us as the offscouring and refuse in the midst of
the people.

3:46 All our enemies have opened their mouths against us.

3:47 Fear and a snare is come upon us, desolation and destruction.

3:48 Mine eye runneth down with rivers of water for the destruction of
the daughter of my people.

3:49 Mine eye trickleth down, and ceaseth not, without any
intermission.

3:50 Till the LORD look down, and behold from heaven.

3:51 Mine eye affecteth mine heart because of all the daughters of my
city.

3:52 Mine enemies chased me sore, like a bird, without cause.

3:53 They have cut off my life in the dungeon, and cast a stone upon
me.

3:54 Waters flowed over mine head; then I said, I am cut off.

3:55 I called upon thy name, O LORD, out of the low dungeon.

3:56 Thou hast heard my voice: hide not thine ear at my breathing, at
my cry.

3:57 Thou drewest near in the day that I called upon thee: thou
saidst, Fear not.

3:58 O LORD, thou hast pleaded the causes of my soul; thou hast
redeemed my life.

3:59 O LORD, thou hast seen my wrong: judge thou my cause.

3:60 Thou hast seen all their vengeance and all their imaginations
against me.

3:61 Thou hast heard their reproach, O LORD, and all their
imaginations against me; 3:62 The lips of those that rose up against
me, and their device against me all the day.

3:63 Behold their sitting down, and their rising up; I am their
musick.

3:64 Render unto them a recompence, O LORD, according to the work of
their hands.

3:65 Give them sorrow of heart, thy curse unto them.

3:66 Persecute and destroy them in anger from under the heavens of the
LORD.

4:1 How is the gold become dim! how is the most fine gold changed! the
stones of the sanctuary are poured out in the top of every street.

4:2 The precious sons of Zion, comparable to fine gold, how are they
esteemed as earthen pitchers, the work of the hands of the potter!
4:3 Even the sea monsters draw out the breast, they give suck to their
young ones: the daughter of my people is become cruel, like the
ostriches in the wilderness.

4:4 The tongue of the sucking child cleaveth to the roof of his mouth
for thirst: the young children ask bread, and no man breaketh it unto
them.

4:5 They that did feed delicately are desolate in the streets: they
that were brought up in scarlet embrace dunghills.

4:6 For the punishment of the iniquity of the daughter of my people is
greater than the punishment of the sin of Sodom, that was overthrown
as in a moment, and no hands stayed on her.

4:7 Her Nazarites were purer than snow, they were whiter than milk,
they were more ruddy in body than rubies, their polishing was of
sapphire: 4:8 Their visage is blacker than a coal; they are not known
in the streets: their skin cleaveth to their bones; it is withered, it
is become like a stick.

4:9 They that be slain with the sword are better than they that be
slain with hunger: for these pine away, stricken through for want of
the fruits of the field.

4:10 The hands of the pitiful women have sodden their own children:
they were their meat in the destruction of the daughter of my people.

4:11 The LORD hath accomplished his fury; he hath poured out his
fierce anger, and hath kindled a fire in Zion, and it hath devoured
the foundations thereof.

4:12 The kings of the earth, and all the inhabitants of the world,
would not have believed that the adversary and the enemy should have
entered into the gates of Jerusalem.

4:13 For the sins of her prophets, and the iniquities of her priests,
that have shed the blood of the just in the midst of her, 4:14 They
have wandered as blind men in the streets, they have polluted
themselves with blood, so that men could not touch their garments.

4:15 They cried unto them, Depart ye; it is unclean; depart, depart,
touch not: when they fled away and wandered, they said among the
heathen, They shall no more sojourn there.

4:16 The anger of the LORD hath divided them; he will no more regard
them: they respected not the persons of the priests, they favoured not
the elders.

4:17 As for us, our eyes as yet failed for our vain help: in our
watching we have watched for a nation that could not save us.

4:18 They hunt our steps, that we cannot go in our streets: our end is
near, our days are fulfilled; for our end is come.

4:19 Our persecutors are swifter than the eagles of the heaven: they
pursued us upon the mountains, they laid wait for us in the
wilderness.

4:20 The breath of our nostrils, the anointed of the LORD, was taken
in their pits, of whom we said, Under his shadow we shall live among
the heathen.

4:21 Rejoice and be glad, O daughter of Edom, that dwellest in the
land of Uz; the cup also shall pass through unto thee: thou shalt be
drunken, and shalt make thyself naked.

4:22 The punishment of thine iniquity is accomplished, O daughter of
Zion; he will no more carry thee away into captivity: he will visit
thine iniquity, O daughter of Edom; he will discover thy sins.

5:1 Remember, O LORD, what is come upon us: consider, and behold our
reproach.

5:2 Our inheritance is turned to strangers, our houses to aliens.

5:3 We are orphans and fatherless, our mothers are as widows.

5:4 We have drunken our water for money; our wood is sold unto us.

5:5 Our necks are under persecution: we labour, and have no rest.

5:6 We have given the hand to the Egyptians, and to the Assyrians, to
be satisfied with bread.

5:7 Our fathers have sinned, and are not; and we have borne their
iniquities.

5:8 Servants have ruled over us: there is none that doth deliver us
out of their hand.

5:9 We gat our bread with the peril of our lives because of the sword
of the wilderness.

5:10 Our skin was black like an oven because of the terrible famine.

5:11 They ravished the women in Zion, and the maids in the cities of
Judah.

5:12 Princes are hanged up by their hand: the faces of elders were not
honoured.

5:13 They took the young men to grind, and the children fell under the
wood.

5:14 The elders have ceased from the gate, the young men from their
musick.

5:15 The joy of our heart is ceased; our dance is turned into
mourning.

5:16 The crown is fallen from our head: woe unto us, that we have
sinned!  5:17 For this our heart is faint; for these things our eyes
are dim.

5:18 Because of the mountain of Zion, which is desolate, the foxes
walk upon it.

5:19 Thou, O LORD, remainest for ever; thy throne from generation to
generation.

5:20 Wherefore dost thou forget us for ever, and forsake us so long
time?  5:21 Turn thou us unto thee, O LORD, and we shall be turned;
renew our days as of old.

5:22 But thou hast utterly rejected us; thou art very wroth against us.




The Book of the Prophet Ezekiel


1:1 Now it came to pass in the thirtieth year, in the fourth month,
in the fifth day of the month, as I was among the captives by the river
of Chebar, that the heavens were opened, and I saw visions of God.

1:2 In the fifth day of the month, which was the fifth year of king
Jehoiachin's captivity, 1:3 The word of the LORD came expressly unto
Ezekiel the priest, the son of Buzi, in the land of the Chaldeans by
the river Chebar; and the hand of the LORD was there upon him.

1:4 And I looked, and, behold, a whirlwind came out of the north, a
great cloud, and a fire infolding itself, and a brightness was about
it, and out of the midst thereof as the colour of amber, out of the
midst of the fire.

1:5 Also out of the midst thereof came the likeness of four living
creatures. And this was their appearance; they had the likeness of a
man.

1:6 And every one had four faces, and every one had four wings.

1:7 And their feet were straight feet; and the sole of their feet was
like the sole of a calf's foot: and they sparkled like the colour of
burnished brass.

1:8 And they had the hands of a man under their wings on their four
sides; and they four had their faces and their wings.

1:9 Their wings were joined one to another; they turned not when they
went; they went every one straight forward.

1:10 As for the likeness of their faces, they four had the face of a
man, and the face of a lion, on the right side: and they four had the
face of an ox on the left side; they four also had the face of an
eagle.

1:11 Thus were their faces: and their wings were stretched upward; two
wings of every one were joined one to another, and two covered their
bodies.

1:12 And they went every one straight forward: whither the spirit was
to go, they went; and they turned not when they went.

1:13 As for the likeness of the living creatures, their appearance was
like burning coals of fire, and like the appearance of lamps: it went
up and down among the living creatures; and the fire was bright, and
out of the fire went forth lightning.

1:14 And the living creatures ran and returned as the appearance of a
flash of lightning.

1:15 Now as I beheld the living creatures, behold one wheel upon the
earth by the living creatures, with his four faces.

1:16 The appearance of the wheels and their work was like unto the
colour of a beryl: and they four had one likeness: and their
appearance and their work was as it were a wheel in the middle of a
wheel.

1:17 When they went, they went upon their four sides: and they turned
not when they went.

1:18 As for their rings, they were so high that they were dreadful;
and their rings were full of eyes round about them four.

1:19 And when the living creatures went, the wheels went by them: and
when the living creatures were lifted up from the earth, the wheels
were lifted up.

1:20 Whithersoever the spirit was to go, they went, thither was their
spirit to go; and the wheels were lifted up over against them: for the
spirit of the living creature was in the wheels.

1:21 When those went, these went; and when those stood, these stood;
and when those were lifted up from the earth, the wheels were lifted
up over against them: for the spirit of the living creature was in the
wheels.

1:22 And the likeness of the firmament upon the heads of the living
creature was as the colour of the terrible crystal, stretched forth
over their heads above.

1:23 And under the firmament were their wings straight, the one toward
the other: every one had two, which covered on this side, and every
one had two, which covered on that side, their bodies.

1:24 And when they went, I heard the noise of their wings, like the
noise of great waters, as the voice of the Almighty, the voice of
speech, as the noise of an host: when they stood, they let down their
wings.

1:25 And there was a voice from the firmament that was over their
heads, when they stood, and had let down their wings.

1:26 And above the firmament that was over their heads was the
likeness of a throne, as the appearance of a sapphire stone: and upon
the likeness of the throne was the likeness as the appearance of a man
above upon it.

1:27 And I saw as the colour of amber, as the appearance of fire round
about within it, from the appearance of his loins even upward, and
from the appearance of his loins even downward, I saw as it were the
appearance of fire, and it had brightness round about.

1:28 As the appearance of the bow that is in the cloud in the day of
rain, so was the appearance of the brightness round about. This was
the appearance of the likeness of the glory of the LORD. And when I
saw it, I fell upon my face, and I heard a voice of one that spake.

2:1 And he said unto me, Son of man, stand upon thy feet, and I will
speak unto thee.

2:2 And the spirit entered into me when he spake unto me, and set me
upon my feet, that I heard him that spake unto me.

2:3 And he said unto me, Son of man, I send thee to the children of
Israel, to a rebellious nation that hath rebelled against me: they and
their fathers have transgressed against me, even unto this very day.

2:4 For they are impudent children and stiffhearted. I do send thee
unto them; and thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD.

2:5 And they, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear,
(for they are a rebellious house,) yet shall know that there hath been
a prophet among them.

2:6 And thou, son of man, be not afraid of them, neither be afraid of
their words, though briers and thorns be with thee, and thou dost
dwell among scorpions: be not afraid of their words, nor be dismayed
at their looks, though they be a rebellious house.

2:7 And thou shalt speak my words unto them, whether they will hear,
or whether they will forbear: for they are most rebellious.

2:8 But thou, son of man, hear what I say unto thee; Be not thou
rebellious like that rebellious house: open thy mouth, and eat that I
give thee.

2:9 And when I looked, behold, an hand was sent unto me; and, lo, a
roll of a book was therein; 2:10 And he spread it before me; and it
was written within and without: and there was written therein
lamentations, and mourning, and woe.

3:1 Moreover he said unto me, Son of man, eat that thou findest; eat
this roll, and go speak unto the house of Israel.

3:2 So I opened my mouth, and he caused me to eat that roll.

3:3 And he said unto me, Son of man, cause thy belly to eat, and fill
thy bowels with this roll that I give thee. Then did I eat it; and it
was in my mouth as honey for sweetness.

3:4 And he said unto me, Son of man, go, get thee unto the house of
Israel, and speak with my words unto them.

3:5 For thou art not sent to a people of a strange speech and of an
hard language, but to the house of Israel; 3:6 Not to many people of a
strange speech and of an hard language, whose words thou canst not
understand. Surely, had I sent thee to them, they would have hearkened
unto thee.

3:7 But the house of Israel will not hearken unto thee; for they will
not hearken unto me: for all the house of Israel are impudent and
hardhearted.

3:8 Behold, I have made thy face strong against their faces, and thy
forehead strong against their foreheads.

3:9 As an adamant harder than flint have I made thy forehead: fear
them not, neither be dismayed at their looks, though they be a
rebellious house.

3:10 Moreover he said unto me, Son of man, all my words that I shall
speak unto thee receive in thine heart, and hear with thine ears.

3:11 And go, get thee to them of the captivity, unto the children of
thy people, and speak unto them, and tell them, Thus saith the Lord
GOD; whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear.

3:12 Then the spirit took me up, and I heard behind me a voice of a
great rushing, saying, Blessed be the glory of the LORD from his
place.

3:13 I heard also the noise of the wings of the living creatures that
touched one another, and the noise of the wheels over against them,
and a noise of a great rushing.

3:14 So the spirit lifted me up, and took me away, and I went in
bitterness, in the heat of my spirit; but the hand of the LORD was
strong upon me.

3:15 Then I came to them of the captivity at Telabib, that dwelt by
the river of Chebar, and I sat where they sat, and remained there
astonished among them seven days.

3:16 And it came to pass at the end of seven days, that the word of
the LORD came unto me, saying, 3:17 Son of man, I have made thee a
watchman unto the house of Israel: therefore hear the word at my
mouth, and give them warning from me.

3:18 When I say unto the wicked, Thou shalt surely die; and thou
givest him not warning, nor speakest to warn the wicked from his
wicked way, to save his life; the same wicked man shall die in his
iniquity; but his blood will I require at thine hand.

3:19 Yet if thou warn the wicked, and he turn not from his wickedness,
nor from his wicked way, he shall die in his iniquity; but thou hast
delivered thy soul.

3:20 Again, When a righteous man doth turn from his righteousness, and
commit iniquity, and I lay a stumbling-block before him, he shall die:
because thou hast not given him warning, he shall die in his sin, and
his righteousness which he hath done shall not be remembered; but his
blood will I require at thine hand.

3:21 Nevertheless if thou warn the righteous man, that the righteous
sin not, and he doth not sin, he shall surely live, because he is
warned; also thou hast delivered thy soul.

3:22 And the hand of the LORD was there upon me; and he said unto me,
Arise, go forth into the plain, and I will there talk with thee.

3:23 Then I arose, and went forth into the plain: and, behold, the
glory of the LORD stood there, as the glory which I saw by the river
of Chebar: and I fell on my face.

3:24 Then the spirit entered into me, and set me upon my feet, and
spake with me, and said unto me, Go, shut thyself within thine house.

3:25 But thou, O son of man, behold, they shall put bands upon thee,
and shall bind thee with them, and thou shalt not go out among them:
3:26 And I will make thy tongue cleave to the roof of thy mouth, that
thou shalt be dumb, and shalt not be to them a reprover: for they are
a rebellious house.

3:27 But when I speak with thee, I will open thy mouth, and thou shalt
say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; He that heareth, let him hear;
and he that forbeareth, let him forbear: for they are a rebellious
house.

4:1 Thou also, son of man, take thee a tile, and lay it before thee,
and pourtray upon it the city, even Jerusalem: 4:2 And lay siege
against it, and build a fort against it, and cast a mount against it;
set the camp also against it, and set battering rams against it round
about.

4:3 Moreover take thou unto thee an iron pan, and set it for a wall of
iron between thee and the city: and set thy face against it, and it
shall be besieged, and thou shalt lay siege against it. This shall be
a sign to the house of Israel.

4:4 Lie thou also upon thy left side, and lay the iniquity of the
house of Israel upon it: according to the number of the days that thou
shalt lie upon it thou shalt bear their iniquity.

4:5 For I have laid upon thee the years of their iniquity, according
to the number of the days, three hundred and ninety days: so shalt
thou bear the iniquity of the house of Israel.

4:6 And when thou hast accomplished them, lie again on thy right side,
and thou shalt bear the iniquity of the house of Judah forty days: I
have appointed thee each day for a year.

4:7 Therefore thou shalt set thy face toward the siege of Jerusalem,
and thine arm shall be uncovered, and thou shalt prophesy against it.

4:8 And, behold, I will lay bands upon thee, and thou shalt not turn
thee from one side to another, till thou hast ended the days of thy
siege.

4:9 Take thou also unto thee wheat, and barley, and beans, and
lentiles, and millet, and fitches, and put them in one vessel, and
make thee bread thereof, according to the number of the days that thou
shalt lie upon thy side, three hundred and ninety days shalt thou eat
thereof.

4:10 And thy meat which thou shalt eat shall be by weight, twenty
shekels a day: from time to time shalt thou eat it.

4:11 Thou shalt drink also water by measure, the sixth part of an hin:
from time to time shalt thou drink.

4:12 And thou shalt eat it as barley cakes, and thou shalt bake it
with dung that cometh out of man, in their sight.

4:13 And the LORD said, Even thus shall the children of Israel eat
their defiled bread among the Gentiles, whither I will drive them.

4:14 Then said I, Ah Lord GOD! behold, my soul hath not been polluted:
for from my youth up even till now have I not eaten of that which
dieth of itself, or is torn in pieces; neither came there abominable
flesh into my mouth.

4:15 Then he said unto me, Lo, I have given thee cow's dung for man's
dung, and thou shalt prepare thy bread therewith.

4:16 Moreover he said unto me, Son of man, behold, I will break the
staff of bread in Jerusalem: and they shall eat bread by weight, and
with care; and they shall drink water by measure, and with
astonishment: 4:17 That they may want bread and water, and be astonied
one with another, and consume away for their iniquity.

5:1 And thou, son of man, take thee a sharp knife, take thee a
barber's razor, and cause it to pass upon thine head and upon thy
beard: then take thee balances to weigh, and divide the hair.

5:2 Thou shalt burn with fire a third part in the midst of the city,
when the days of the siege are fulfilled: and thou shalt take a third
part, and smite about it with a knife: and a third part thou shalt
scatter in the wind; and I will draw out a sword after them.

5:3 Thou shalt also take thereof a few in number, and bind them in thy
skirts.

5:4 Then take of them again, and cast them into the midst of the fire,
and burn them in the fire; for thereof shall a fire come forth into
all the house of Israel.

5:5 Thus saith the Lord GOD; This is Jerusalem: I have set it in the
midst of the nations and countries that are round about her.

5:6 And she hath changed my judgments into wickedness more than the
nations, and my statutes more than the countries that are round about
her: for they have refused my judgments and my statutes, they have not
walked in them.

5:7 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Because ye multiplied more than
the nations that are round about you, and have not walked in my
statutes, neither have kept my judgments, neither have done according
to the judgments of the nations that are round about you; 5:8
Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I, even I, am against thee,
and will execute judgments in the midst of thee in the sight of the
nations.

5:9 And I will do in thee that which I have not done, and whereunto I
will not do any more the like, because of all thine abominations.

5:10 Therefore the fathers shall eat the sons in the midst of thee,
and the sons shall eat their fathers; and I will execute judgments in
thee, and the whole remnant of thee will I scatter into all the winds.

5:11 Wherefore, as I live, saith the Lord GOD; Surely, because thou
hast defiled my sanctuary with all thy detestable things, and with all
thine abominations, therefore will I also diminish thee; neither shall
mine eye spare, neither will I have any pity.

5:12 A third part of thee shall die with the pestilence, and with
famine shall they be consumed in the midst of thee: and a third part
shall fall by the sword round about thee; and I will scatter a third
part into all the winds, and I will draw out a sword after them.

5:13 Thus shall mine anger be accomplished, and I will cause my fury
to rest upon them, and I will be comforted: and they shall know that I
the LORD have spoken it in my zeal, when I have accomplished my fury
in them.

5:14 Moreover I will make thee waste, and a reproach among the nations
that are round about thee, in the sight of all that pass by.

5:15 So it shall be a reproach and a taunt, an instruction and an
astonishment unto the nations that are round about thee, when I shall
execute judgments in thee in anger and in fury and in furious rebukes.
I the LORD have spoken it.

5:16 When I shall send upon them the evil arrows of famine, which
shall be for their destruction, and which I will send to destroy you:
and I will increase the famine upon you, and will break your staff of
bread: 5:17 So will I send upon you famine and evil beasts, and they
shall bereave thee: and pestilence and blood shall pass through thee;
and I will bring the sword upon thee. I the LORD have spoken it.

6:1 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 6:2 Son of man, set
thy face toward the mountains of Israel, and prophesy against them,
6:3 And say, Ye mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord GOD;
Thus saith the Lord GOD to the mountains, and to the hills, to the
rivers, and to the valleys; Behold, I, even I, will bring a sword upon
you, and I will destroy your high places.

6:4 And your altars shall be desolate, and your images shall be
broken: and I will cast down your slain men before your idols.

6:5 And I will lay the dead carcases of the children of Israel before
their idols; and I will scatter your bones round about your altars.

6:6 In all your dwellingplaces the cities shall be laid waste, and the
high places shall be desolate; that your altars may be laid waste and
made desolate, and your idols may be broken and cease, and your images
may be cut down, and your works may be abolished.

6:7 And the slain shall fall in the midst of you, and ye shall know
that I am the LORD.

6:8 Yet will I leave a remnant, that ye may have some that shall
escape the sword among the nations, when ye shall be scattered through
the countries.

6:9 And they that escape of you shall remember me among the nations
whither they shall be carried captives, because I am broken with their
whorish heart, which hath departed from me, and with their eyes, which
go a whoring after their idols: and they shall lothe themselves for
the evils which they have committed in all their abominations.

6:10 And they shall know that I am the LORD, and that I have not said
in vain that I would do this evil unto them.

6:11 Thus saith the Lord GOD; Smite with thine hand, and stamp with
thy foot, and say, Alas for all the evil abominations of the house of
Israel! for they shall fall by the sword, by the famine, and by the
pestilence.

6:12 He that is far off shall die of the pestilence; and he that is
near shall fall by the sword; and he that remaineth and is besieged
shall die by the famine: thus will I accomplish my fury upon them.

6:13 Then shall ye know that I am the LORD, when their slain men shall
be among their idols round about their altars, upon every high hill,
in all the tops of the mountains, and under every green tree, and
under every thick oak, the place where they did offer sweet savour to
all their idols.

6:14 So will I stretch out my hand upon them, and make the land
desolate, yea, more desolate than the wilderness toward Diblath, in
all their habitations: and they shall know that I am the LORD.

7:1 Moreover the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 7:2 Also, thou
son of man, thus saith the Lord GOD unto the land of Israel; An end,
the end is come upon the four corners of the land.

7:3 Now is the end come upon thee, and I will send mine anger upon
thee, and will judge thee according to thy ways, and will recompense
upon thee all thine abominations.

7:4 And mine eye shall not spare thee, neither will I have pity: but I
will recompense thy ways upon thee, and thine abominations shall be in
the midst of thee: and ye shall know that I am the LORD.

7:5 Thus saith the Lord GOD; An evil, an only evil, behold, is come.

7:6 An end is come, the end is come: it watcheth for thee; behold, it
is come.

7:7 The morning is come unto thee, O thou that dwellest in the land:
the time is come, the day of trouble is near, and not the sounding
again of the mountains.

7:8 Now will I shortly pour out my fury upon thee, and accomplish mine
anger upon thee: and I will judge thee according to thy ways, and will
recompense thee for all thine abominations.

7:9 And mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity: I will
recompense thee according to thy ways and thine abominations that are
in the midst of thee; and ye shall know that I am the LORD that
smiteth.

7:10 Behold the day, behold, it is come: the morning is gone forth;
the rod hath blossomed, pride hath budded.

7:11 Violence is risen up into a rod of wickedness: none of them shall
remain, nor of their multitude, nor of any of their's: neither shall
there be wailing for them.

7:12 The time is come, the day draweth near: let not the buyer
rejoice, nor the seller mourn: for wrath is upon all the multitude
thereof.

7:13 For the seller shall not return to that which is sold, although
they were yet alive: for the vision is touching the whole multitude
thereof, which shall not return; neither shall any strengthen himself
in the iniquity of his life.

7:14 They have blown the trumpet, even to make all ready; but none
goeth to the battle: for my wrath is upon all the multitude thereof.

7:15 The sword is without, and the pestilence and the famine within:
he that is in the field shall die with the sword; and he that is in
the city, famine and pestilence shall devour him.

7:16 But they that escape of them shall escape, and shall be on the
mountains like doves of the valleys, all of them mourning, every one
for his iniquity.

7:17 All hands shall be feeble, and all knees shall be weak as water.

7:18 They shall also gird themselves with sackcloth, and horror shall
cover them; and shame shall be upon all faces, and baldness upon all
their heads.

7:19 They shall cast their silver in the streets, and their gold shall
be removed: their silver and their gold shall not be able to deliver
them in the day of the wrath of the LORD: they shall not satisfy their
souls, neither fill their bowels: because it is the stumblingblock of
their iniquity.

7:20 As for the beauty of his ornament, he set it in majesty: but they
made the images of their abominations and of their detestable things
therein: therefore have I set it far from them.

7:21 And I will give it into the hands of the strangers for a prey,
and to the wicked of the earth for a spoil; and they shall pollute it.

7:22 My face will I turn also from them, and they shall pollute my
secret place: for the robbers shall enter into it, and defile it.

7:23 Make a chain: for the land is full of bloody crimes, and the city
is full of violence.

7:24 Wherefore I will bring the worst of the heathen, and they shall
possess their houses: I will also make the pomp of the strong to
cease; and their holy places shall be defiled.

7:25 Destruction cometh; and they shall seek peace, and there shall be
none.

7:26 Mischief shall come upon mischief, and rumour shall be upon
rumour; then shall they seek a vision of the prophet; but the law
shall perish from the priest, and counsel from the ancients.

7:27 The king shall mourn, and the prince shall be clothed with
desolation, and the hands of the people of the land shall be troubled:
I will do unto them after their way, and according to their deserts
will I judge them; and they shall know that I am the LORD.

8:1 And it came to pass in the sixth year, in the sixth month, in the
fifth day of the month, as I sat in mine house, and the elders of
Judah sat before me, that the hand of the Lord GOD fell there upon me.

8:2 Then I beheld, and lo a likeness as the appearance of fire: from
the appearance of his loins even downward, fire; and from his loins
even upward, as the appearance of brightness, as the colour of amber.

8:3 And he put forth the form of an hand, and took me by a lock of
mine head; and the spirit lifted me up between the earth and the
heaven, and brought me in the visions of God to Jerusalem, to the door
of the inner gate that looketh toward the north; where was the seat of
the image of jealousy, which provoketh to jealousy.

8:4 And, behold, the glory of the God of Israel was there, according
to the vision that I saw in the plain.

8:5 Then said he unto me, Son of man, lift up thine eyes now the way
toward the north. So I lifted up mine eyes the way toward the north,
and behold northward at the gate of the altar this image of jealousy
in the entry.

8:6 He said furthermore unto me, Son of man, seest thou what they do?
even the great abominations that the house of Israel committeth here,
that I should go far off from my sanctuary? but turn thee yet again,
and thou shalt see greater abominations.

8:7 And he brought me to the door of the court; and when I looked,
behold a hole in the wall.

8:8 Then said he unto me, Son of man, dig now in the wall: and when I
had digged in the wall, behold a door.

8:9 And he said unto me, Go in, and behold the wicked abominations
that they do here.

8:10 So I went in and saw; and behold every form of creeping things,
and abominable beasts, and all the idols of the house of Israel,
pourtrayed upon the wall round about.

8:11 And there stood before them seventy men of the ancients of the
house of Israel, and in the midst of them stood Jaazaniah the son of
Shaphan, with every man his censer in his hand; and a thick cloud of
incense went up.

8:12 Then said he unto me, Son of man, hast thou seen what the
ancients of the house of Israel do in the dark, every man in the
chambers of his imagery? for they say, the LORD seeth us not; the LORD
hath forsaken the earth.

8:13 He said also unto me, Turn thee yet again, and thou shalt see
greater abominations that they do.

8:14 Then he brought me to the door of the gate of the LORD's house
which was toward the north; and, behold, there sat women weeping for
Tammuz.

8:15 Then said he unto me, Hast thou seen this, O son of man? turn
thee yet again, and thou shalt see greater abominations than these.

8:16 And he brought me into the inner court of the LORD's house, and,
behold, at the door of the temple of the LORD, between the porch and
the altar, were about five and twenty men, with their backs toward the
temple of the LORD, and their faces toward the east; and they
worshipped the sun toward the east.

8:17 Then he said unto me, Hast thou seen this, O son of man? Is it a
light thing to the house of Judah that they commit the abominations
which they commit here? for they have filled the land with violence,
and have returned to provoke me to anger: and, lo, they put the branch
to their nose.

8:18 Therefore will I also deal in fury: mine eye shall not spare,
neither will I have pity: and though they cry in mine ears with a loud
voice, yet will I not hear them.

9:1 He cried also in mine ears with a loud voice, saying, Cause them
that have charge over the city to draw near, even every man with his
destroying weapon in his hand.

9:2 And, behold, six men came from the way of the higher gate, which
lieth toward the north, and every man a slaughter weapon in his hand;
and one man among them was clothed with linen, with a writer's inkhorn
by his side: and they went in, and stood beside the brasen altar.

9:3 And the glory of the God of Israel was gone up from the cherub,
whereupon he was, to the threshold of the house. And he called to the
man clothed with linen, which had the writer's inkhorn by his side;
9:4 And the LORD said unto him, Go through the midst of the city,
through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the foreheads of
the men that sigh and that cry for all the abominations that be done
in the midst thereof.

9:5 And to the others he said in mine hearing, Go ye after him through
the city, and smite: let not your eye spare, neither have ye pity: 9:6
Slay utterly old and young, both maids, and little children, and
women: but come not near any man upon whom is the mark; and begin at
my sanctuary. Then they began at the ancient men which were before the
house.

9:7 And he said unto them, Defile the house, and fill the courts with
the slain: go ye forth. And they went forth, and slew in the city.

9:8 And it came to pass, while they were slaying them, and I was left,
that I fell upon my face, and cried, and said, Ah Lord GOD! wilt thou
destroy all the residue of Israel in thy pouring out of thy fury upon
Jerusalem?  9:9 Then said he unto me, The iniquity of the house of
Israel and Judah is exceeding great, and the land is full of blood,
and the city full of perverseness: for they say, The LORD hath
forsaken the earth, and the LORD seeth not.

9:10 And as for me also, mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have
pity, but I will recompense their way upon their head.

9:11 And, behold, the man clothed with linen, which had the inkhorn by
his side, reported the matter, saying, I have done as thou hast
commanded me.

10:1 Then I looked, and, behold, in the firmament that was above the
head of the cherubims there appeared over them as it were a sapphire
stone, as the appearance of the likeness of a throne.

10:2 And he spake unto the man clothed with linen, and said, Go in
between the wheels, even under the cherub, and fill thine hand with
coals of fire from between the cherubims, and scatter them over the
city. And he went in in my sight.

10:3 Now the cherubims stood on the right side of the house, when the
man went in; and the cloud filled the inner court.

10:4 Then the glory of the LORD went up from the cherub, and stood
over the threshold of the house; and the house was filled with the
cloud, and the court was full of the brightness of the LORD's glory.

10:5 And the sound of the cherubims' wings was heard even to the outer
court, as the voice of the Almighty God when he speaketh.

10:6 And it came to pass, that when he had commanded the man clothed
with linen, saying, Take fire from between the wheels, from between
the cherubims; then he went in, and stood beside the wheels.

10:7 And one cherub stretched forth his hand from between the
cherubims unto the fire that was between the cherubims, and took
thereof, and put it into the hands of him that was clothed with linen:
who took it, and went out.

10:8 And there appeared in the cherubims the form of a man's hand
under their wings.

10:9 And when I looked, behold the four wheels by the cherubims, one
wheel by one cherub, and another wheel by another cherub: and the
appearance of the wheels was as the colour of a beryl stone.

10:10 And as for their appearances, they four had one likeness, as if
a wheel had been in the midst of a wheel.

10:11 When they went, they went upon their four sides; they turned not
as they went, but to the place whither the head looked they followed
it; they turned not as they went.

10:12 And their whole body, and their backs, and their hands, and
their wings, and the wheels, were full of eyes round about, even the
wheels that they four had.

10:13 As for the wheels, it was cried unto them in my hearing, O
wheel.

10:14 And every one had four faces: the first face was the face of a
cherub, and the second face was the face of a man, and the third the
face of a lion, and the fourth the face of an eagle.

10:15 And the cherubims were lifted up. This is the living creature
that I saw by the river of Chebar.

10:16 And when the cherubims went, the wheels went by them: and when
the cherubims lifted up their wings to mount up from the earth, the
same wheels also turned not from beside them.

10:17 When they stood, these stood; and when they were lifted up,
these lifted up themselves also: for the spirit of the living creature
was in them.

10:18 Then the glory of the LORD departed from off the threshold of
the house, and stood over the cherubims.

10:19 And the cherubims lifted up their wings, and mounted up from the
earth in my sight: when they went out, the wheels also were beside
them, and every one stood at the door of the east gate of the LORD's
house; and the glory of the God of Israel was over them above.

10:20 This is the living creature that I saw under the God of Israel
by the river of Chebar; and I knew that they were the cherubims.

10:21 Every one had four faces apiece, and every one four wings; and
the likeness of the hands of a man was under their wings.

10:22 And the likeness of their faces was the same faces which I saw
by the river of Chebar, their appearances and themselves: they went
every one straight forward.

11:1 Moreover the spirit lifted me up, and brought me unto the east
gate of the LORD's house, which looketh eastward: and behold at the
door of the gate five and twenty men; among whom I saw Jaazaniah the
son of Azur, and Pelatiah the son of Benaiah, princes of the people.

11:2 Then said he unto me, Son of man, these are the men that devise
mischief, and give wicked counsel in this city: 11:3 Which say, It is
not near; let us build houses: this city is the caldron, and we be the
flesh.

11:4 Therefore prophesy against them, prophesy, O son of man.

11:5 And the Spirit of the LORD fell upon me, and said unto me, Speak;
Thus saith the LORD; Thus have ye said, O house of Israel: for I know
the things that come into your mind, every one of them.

11:6 Ye have multiplied your slain in this city, and ye have filled
the streets thereof with the slain.

11:7 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Your slain whom ye have laid
in the midst of it, they are the flesh, and this city is the caldron:
but I will bring you forth out of the midst of it.

11:8 Ye have feared the sword; and I will bring a sword upon you,
saith the Lord GOD.

11:9 And I will bring you out of the midst thereof, and deliver you
into the hands of strangers, and will execute judgments among you.

11:10 Ye shall fall by the sword; I will judge you in the border of
Israel; and ye shall know that I am the LORD.

11:11 This city shall not be your caldron, neither shall ye be the
flesh in the midst thereof; but I will judge you in the border of
Israel: 11:12 And ye shall know that I am the LORD: for ye have not
walked in my statutes, neither executed my judgments, but have done
after the manners of the heathen that are round about you.

11:13 And it came to pass, when I prophesied, that Pelatiah the son of
Benaiah died. Then fell I down upon my face, and cried with a loud
voice, and said, Ah Lord GOD! wilt thou make a full end of the remnant
of Israel?  11:14 Again the word of the LORD came unto me, saying,
11:15 Son of man, thy brethren, even thy brethren, the men of thy
kindred, and all the house of Israel wholly, are they unto whom the
inhabitants of Jerusalem have said, Get you far from the LORD: unto us
is this land given in possession.

11:16 Therefore say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Although I have cast
them far off among the heathen, and although I have scattered them
among the countries, yet will I be to them as a little sanctuary in
the countries where they shall come.

11:17 Therefore say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; I will even gather you
from the people, and assemble you out of the countries where ye have
been scattered, and I will give you the land of Israel.

11:18 And they shall come thither, and they shall take away all the
detestable things thereof and all the abominations thereof from
thence.

11:19 And I will give them one heart, and I will put a new spirit
within you; and I will take the stony heart out of their flesh, and
will give them an heart of flesh: 11:20 That they may walk in my
statutes, and keep mine ordinances, and do them: and they shall be my
people, and I will be their God.

11:21 But as for them whose heart walketh after the heart of their
detestable things and their abominations, I will recompense their way
upon their own heads, saith the Lord GOD.

11:22 Then did the cherubims lift up their wings, and the wheels
beside them; and the glory of the God of Israel was over them above.

11:23 And the glory of the LORD went up from the midst of the city,
and stood upon the mountain which is on the east side of the city.

11:24 Afterwards the spirit took me up, and brought me in a vision by
the Spirit of God into Chaldea, to them of the captivity. So the
vision that I had seen went up from me.

11:25 Then I spake unto them of the captivity all the things that the
LORD had shewed me.

12:1 The word of the LORD also came unto me, saying, 12:2 Son of man,
thou dwellest in the midst of a rebellious house, which have eyes to
see, and see not; they have ears to hear, and hear not: for they are a
rebellious house.

12:3 Therefore, thou son of man, prepare thee stuff for removing, and
remove by day in their sight; and thou shalt remove from thy place to
another place in their sight: it may be they will consider, though
they be a rebellious house.

12:4 Then shalt thou bring forth thy stuff by day in their sight, as
stuff for removing: and thou shalt go forth at even in their sight, as
they that go forth into captivity.

12:5 Dig thou through the wall in their sight, and carry out thereby.

12:6 In their sight shalt thou bear it upon thy shoulders, and carry
it forth in the twilight: thou shalt cover thy face, that thou see not
the ground: for I have set thee for a sign unto the house of Israel.

12:7 And I did so as I was commanded: I brought forth my stuff by day,
as stuff for captivity, and in the even I digged through the wall with
mine hand; I brought it forth in the twilight, and I bare it upon my
shoulder in their sight.

12:8 And in the morning came the word of the LORD unto me, saying,
12:9 Son of man, hath not the house of Israel, the rebellious house,
said unto thee, What doest thou?  12:10 Say thou unto them, Thus saith
the Lord GOD; This burden concerneth the prince in Jerusalem, and all
the house of Israel that are among them.

12:11 Say, I am your sign: like as I have done, so shall it be done
unto them: they shall remove and go into captivity.

12:12 And the prince that is among them shall bear upon his shoulder
in the twilight, and shall go forth: they shall dig through the wall
to carry out thereby: he shall cover his face, that he see not the
ground with his eyes.

12:13 My net also will I spread upon him, and he shall be taken in my
snare: and I will bring him to Babylon to the land of the Chaldeans;
yet shall he not see it, though he shall die there.

12:14 And I will scatter toward every wind all that are about him to
help him, and all his bands; and I will draw out the sword after them.

12:15 And they shall know that I am the LORD, when I shall scatter
them among the nations, and disperse them in the countries.

12:16 But I will leave a few men of them from the sword, from the
famine, and from the pestilence; that they may declare all their
abominations among the heathen whither they come; and they shall know
that I am the LORD.

12:17 Moreover the word of the LORD came to me, saying, 12:18 Son of
man, eat thy bread with quaking, and drink thy water with trembling
and with carefulness; 12:19 And say unto the people of the land, Thus
saith the Lord GOD of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and of the land of
Israel; They shall eat their bread with carefulness, and drink their
water with astonishment, that her land may be desolate from all that
is therein, because of the violence of all them that dwell therein.

12:20 And the cities that are inhabited shall be laid waste, and the
land shall be desolate; and ye shall know that I am the LORD.

12:21 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 12:22 Son of man,
what is that proverb that ye have in the land of Israel, saying, The
days are prolonged, and every vision faileth?  12:23 Tell them
therefore, Thus saith the Lord GOD; I will make this proverb to cease,
and they shall no more use it as a proverb in Israel; but say unto
them, The days are at hand, and the effect of every vision.

12:24 For there shall be no more any vain vision nor flattering
divination within the house of Israel.

12:25 For I am the LORD: I will speak, and the word that I shall speak
shall come to pass; it shall be no more prolonged: for in your days, O
rebellious house, will I say the word, and will perform it, saith the
Lord GOD.

12:26 Again the word of the LORD came to me, saying.

12:27 Son of man, behold, they of the house of Israel say, The vision
that he seeth is for many days to come, and he prophesieth of the
times that are far off.

12:28 Therefore say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; There shall
none of my words be prolonged any more, but the word which I have
spoken shall be done, saith the Lord GOD.

13:1 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 13:2 Son of man,
prophesy against the prophets of Israel that prophesy, and say thou
unto them that prophesy out of their own hearts, Hear ye the word of
the LORD; 13:3 Thus saith the Lord GOD; Woe unto the foolish prophets,
that follow their own spirit, and have seen nothing!  13:4 O Israel,
thy prophets are like the foxes in the deserts.

13:5 Ye have not gone up into the gaps, neither made up the hedge for
the house of Israel to stand in the battle in the day of the LORD.

13:6 They have seen vanity and lying divination, saying, The LORD
saith: and the LORD hath not sent them: and they have made others to
hope that they would confirm the word.

13:7 Have ye not seen a vain vision, and have ye not spoken a lying
divination, whereas ye say, The LORD saith it; albeit I have not
spoken?  13:8 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Because ye have
spoken vanity, and seen lies, therefore, behold, I am against you,
saith the Lord GOD.

13:9 And mine hand shall be upon the prophets that see vanity, and
that divine lies: they shall not be in the assembly of my people,
neither shall they be written in the writing of the house of Israel,
neither shall they enter into the land of Israel; and ye shall know
that I am the Lord GOD.

13:10 Because, even because they have seduced my people, saying,
Peace; and there was no peace; and one built up a wall, and, lo,
others daubed it with untempered morter: 13:11 Say unto them which
daub it with untempered morter, that it shall fall: there shall be an
overflowing shower; and ye, O great hailstones, shall fall; and a
stormy wind shall rend it.

13:12 Lo, when the wall is fallen, shall it not be said unto you,
Where is the daubing wherewith ye have daubed it?  13:13 Therefore
thus saith the Lord GOD; I will even rend it with a stormy wind in my
fury; and there shall be an overflowing shower in mine anger, and
great hailstones in my fury to consume it.

13:14 So will I break down the wall that ye have daubed with
untempered morter, and bring it down to the ground, so that the
foundation thereof shall be discovered, and it shall fall, and ye
shall be consumed in the midst thereof: and ye shall know that I am
the LORD.

13:15 Thus will I accomplish my wrath upon the wall, and upon them
that have daubed it with untempered morter, and will say unto you, The
wall is no more, neither they that daubed it; 13:16 To wit, the
prophets of Israel which prophesy concerning Jerusalem, and which see
visions of peace for her, and there is no peace, saith the Lord GOD.

13:17 Likewise, thou son of man, set thy face against the daughters of
thy people, which prophesy out of their own heart; and prophesy thou
against them, 13:18 And say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Woe to the women
that sew pillows to all armholes, and make kerchiefs upon the head of
every stature to hunt souls! Will ye hunt the souls of my people, and
will ye save the souls alive that come unto you?  13:19 And will ye
pollute me among my people for handfuls of barley and for pieces of
bread, to slay the souls that should not die, and to save the souls
alive that should not live, by your lying to my people that hear your
lies?  13:20 Wherefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I am against
your pillows, wherewith ye there hunt the souls to make them fly, and
I will tear them from your arms, and will let the souls go, even the
souls that ye hunt to make them fly.

13:21 Your kerchiefs also will I tear, and deliver my people out of
your hand, and they shall be no more in your hand to be hunted; and ye
shall know that I am the LORD.

13:22 Because with lies ye have made the heart of the righteous sad,
whom I have not made sad; and strengthened the hands of the wicked,
that he should not return from his wicked way, by promising him life:
13:23 Therefore ye shall see no more vanity, nor divine divinations:
for I will deliver my people out of your hand: and ye shall know that
I am the LORD.

14:1 Then came certain of the elders of Israel unto me, and sat before
me.

14:2 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 14:3 Son of man,
these men have set up their idols in their heart, and put the
stumblingblock of their iniquity before their face: should I be
enquired of at all by them?  14:4 Therefore speak unto them, and say
unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Every man of the house of Israel
that setteth up his idols in his heart, and putteth the stumblingblock
of his iniquity before his face, and cometh to the prophet; I the LORD
will answer him that cometh according to the multitude of his idols;
14:5 That I may take the house of Israel in their own heart, because
they are all estranged from me through their idols.

14:6 Therefore say unto the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord GOD;
Repent, and turn yourselves from your idols; and turn away your faces
from all your abominations.

14:7 For every one of the house of Israel, or of the stranger that
sojourneth in Israel, which separateth himself from me, and setteth up
his idols in his heart, and putteth the stumblingblock of his iniquity
before his face, and cometh to a prophet to enquire of him concerning
me; I the LORD will answer him by myself: 14:8 And I will set my face
against that man, and will make him a sign and a proverb, and I will
cut him off from the midst of my people; and ye shall know that I am
the LORD.

14:9 And if the prophet be deceived when he hath spoken a thing, I the
LORD have deceived that prophet, and I will stretch out my hand upon
him, and will destroy him from the midst of my people Israel.

14:10 And they shall bear the punishment of their iniquity: the
punishment of the prophet shall be even as the punishment of him that
seeketh unto him; 14:11 That the house of Israel may go no more astray
from me, neither be polluted any more with all their transgressions;
but that they may be my people, and I may be their God, saith the Lord
GOD.

14:12 The word of the LORD came again to me, saying, 14:13 Son of man,
when the land sinneth against me by trespassing grievously, then will
I stretch out mine hand upon it, and will break the staff of the bread
thereof, and will send famine upon it, and will cut off man and beast
from it: 14:14 Though these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job, were in
it, they should deliver but their own souls by their righteousness,
saith the Lord GOD.

14:15 If I cause noisome beasts to pass through the land, and they
spoil it, so that it be desolate, that no man may pass through because
of the beasts: 14:16 Though these three men were in it, as I live,
saith the Lord GOD, they shall deliver neither sons nor daughters;
they only shall be delivered, but the land shall be desolate.

14:17 Or if I bring a sword upon that land, and say, Sword, go through
the land; so that I cut off man and beast from it: 14:18 Though these
three men were in it, as I live, saith the Lord GOD, they shall
deliver neither sons nor daughters, but they only shall be delivered
themselves.

14:19 Or if I send a pestilence into that land, and pour out my fury
upon it in blood, to cut off from it man and beast: 14:20 Though Noah,
Daniel, and Job were in it, as I live, saith the Lord GOD, they shall
deliver neither son nor daughter; they shall but deliver their own
souls by their righteousness.

14:21 For thus saith the Lord GOD; How much more when I send my four
sore judgments upon Jerusalem, the sword, and the famine, and the
noisome beast, and the pestilence, to cut off from it man and beast?
14:22 Yet, behold, therein shall be left a remnant that shall be
brought forth, both sons and daughters: behold, they shall come forth
unto you, and ye shall see their way and their doings: and ye shall be
comforted concerning the evil that I have brought upon Jerusalem, even
concerning all that I have brought upon it.

14:23 And they shall comfort you, when ye see their ways and their
doings: and ye shall know that I have not done without cause all that
I have done in it, saith the Lord GOD.

15:1 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 15:2 Son of man,
what is the vine tree more than any tree, or than a branch which is
among the trees of the forest?  15:3 Shall wood be taken thereof to do
any work? or will men take a pin of it to hang any vessel thereon?
15:4 Behold, it is cast into the fire for fuel; the fire devoureth
both the ends of it, and the midst of it is burned. Is it meet for any
work?  15:5 Behold, when it was whole, it was meet for no work: how
much less shall it be meet yet for any work, when the fire hath
devoured it, and it is burned?  15:6 Therefore thus saith the Lord
GOD; As the vine tree among the trees of the forest, which I have
given to the fire for fuel, so will I give the inhabitants of
Jerusalem.

15:7 And I will set my face against them; they shall go out from one
fire, and another fire shall devour them; and ye shall know that I am
the LORD, when I set my face against them.

15:8 And I will make the land desolate, because they have committed a
trespass, saith the Lord GOD.

16:1 Again the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 16:2 Son of man,
cause Jerusalem to know her abominations, 16:3 And say, Thus saith the
Lord GOD unto Jerusalem; Thy birth and thy nativity is of the land of
Canaan; thy father was an Amorite, and thy mother an Hittite.

16:4 And as for thy nativity, in the day thou wast born thy navel was
not cut, neither wast thou washed in water to supple thee; thou wast
not salted at all, nor swaddled at all.

16:5 None eye pitied thee, to do any of these unto thee, to have
compassion upon thee; but thou wast cast out in the open field, to the
lothing of thy person, in the day that thou wast born.

16:6 And when I passed by thee, and saw thee polluted in thine own
blood, I said unto thee when thou wast in thy blood, Live; yea, I said
unto thee when thou wast in thy blood, Live.

16:7 I have caused thee to multiply as the bud of the field, and thou
hast increased and waxen great, and thou art come to excellent
ornaments: thy breasts are fashioned, and thine hair is grown, whereas
thou wast naked and bare.

16:8 Now when I passed by thee, and looked upon thee, behold, thy time
was the time of love; and I spread my skirt over thee, and covered thy
nakedness: yea, I sware unto thee, and entered into a covenant with
thee, saith the Lord GOD, and thou becamest mine.

16:9 Then washed I thee with water; yea, I throughly washed away thy
blood from thee, and I anointed thee with oil.

16:10 I clothed thee also with broidered work, and shod thee with
badgers' skin, and I girded thee about with fine linen, and I covered
thee with silk.

16:11 I decked thee also with ornaments, and I put bracelets upon thy
hands, and a chain on thy neck.

16:12 And I put a jewel on thy forehead, and earrings in thine ears,
and a beautiful crown upon thine head.

16:13 Thus wast thou decked with gold and silver; and thy raiment was
of fine linen, and silk, and broidered work; thou didst eat fine
flour, and honey, and oil: and thou wast exceeding beautiful, and thou
didst prosper into a kingdom.

16:14 And thy renown went forth among the heathen for thy beauty: for
it was perfect through my comeliness, which I had put upon thee, saith
the Lord GOD.

16:15 But thou didst trust in thine own beauty, and playedst the
harlot because of thy renown, and pouredst out thy fornications on
every one that passed by; his it was.

16:16 And of thy garments thou didst take, and deckedst thy high
places with divers colours, and playedst the harlot thereupon: the
like things shall not come, neither shall it be so.

16:17 Thou hast also taken thy fair jewels of my gold and of my
silver, which I had given thee, and madest to thyself images of men,
and didst commit whoredom with them, 16:18 And tookest thy broidered
garments, and coveredst them: and thou hast set mine oil and mine
incense before them.

16:19 My meat also which I gave thee, fine flour, and oil, and honey,
wherewith I fed thee, thou hast even set it before them for a sweet
savour: and thus it was, saith the Lord GOD.

16:20 Moreover thou hast taken thy sons and thy daughters, whom thou
hast borne unto me, and these hast thou sacrificed unto them to be
devoured. Is this of thy whoredoms a small matter, 16:21 That thou
hast slain my children, and delivered them to cause them to pass
through the fire for them?  16:22 And in all thine abominations and
thy whoredoms thou hast not remembered the days of thy youth, when
thou wast naked and bare, and wast polluted in thy blood.

16:23 And it came to pass after all thy wickedness, (woe, woe unto
thee!  saith the LORD GOD;) 16:24 That thou hast also built unto thee
an eminent place, and hast made thee an high place in every street.

16:25 Thou hast built thy high place at every head of the way, and
hast made thy beauty to be abhorred, and hast opened thy feet to every
one that passed by, and multiplied thy whoredoms.

16:26 Thou hast also committed fornication with the Egyptians thy
neighbours, great of flesh; and hast increased thy whoredoms, to
provoke me to anger.

16:27 Behold, therefore I have stretched out my hand over thee, and
have diminished thine ordinary food, and delivered thee unto the will
of them that hate thee, the daughters of the Philistines, which are
ashamed of thy lewd way.

16:28 Thou hast played the whore also with the Assyrians, because thou
wast unsatiable; yea, thou hast played the harlot with them, and yet
couldest not be satisfied.

16:29 Thou hast moreover multiplied thy fornication in the land of
Canaan unto Chaldea; and yet thou wast not satisfied therewith.

16:30 How weak is thine heart, saith the LORD GOD, seeing thou doest
all these things, the work of an imperious whorish woman; 16:31 In
that thou buildest thine eminent place in the head of every way, and
makest thine high place in every street; and hast not been as an
harlot, in that thou scornest hire; 16:32 But as a wife that
committeth adultery, which taketh strangers instead of her husband!
16:33 They give gifts to all whores: but thou givest thy gifts to all
thy lovers, and hirest them, that they may come unto thee on every
side for thy whoredom.

16:34 And the contrary is in thee from other women in thy whoredoms,
whereas none followeth thee to commit whoredoms: and in that thou
givest a reward, and no reward is given unto thee, therefore thou art
contrary.

16:35 Wherefore, O harlot, hear the word of the LORD: 16:36 Thus saith
the Lord GOD; Because thy filthiness was poured out, and thy nakedness
discovered through thy whoredoms with thy lovers, and with all the
idols of thy abominations, and by the blood of thy children, which
thou didst give unto them; 16:37 Behold, therefore I will gather all
thy lovers, with whom thou hast taken pleasure, and all them that thou
hast loved, with all them that thou hast hated; I will even gather
them round about against thee, and will discover thy nakedness unto
them, that they may see all thy nakedness.

16:38 And I will judge thee, as women that break wedlock and shed
blood are judged; and I will give thee blood in fury and jealousy.

16:39 And I will also give thee into their hand, and they shall throw
down thine eminent place, and shall break down thy high places: they
shall strip thee also of thy clothes, and shall take thy fair jewels,
and leave thee naked and bare.

16:40 They shall also bring up a company against thee, and they shall
stone thee with stones, and thrust thee through with their swords.

16:41 And they shall burn thine houses with fire, and execute
judgments upon thee in the sight of many women: and I will cause thee
to cease from playing the harlot, and thou also shalt give no hire any
more.

16:42 So will I make my fury toward thee to rest, and my jealousy
shall depart from thee, and I will be quiet, and will be no more
angry.

16:43 Because thou hast not remembered the days of thy youth, but hast
fretted me in all these things; behold, therefore I also will
recompense thy way upon thine head, saith the Lord GOD: and thou shalt
not commit this lewdness above all thine abominations.

16:44 Behold, every one that useth proverbs shall use this proverb
against thee, saying, As is the mother, so is her daughter.

16:45 Thou art thy mother's daughter, that lotheth her husband and her
children; and thou art the sister of thy sisters, which lothed their
husbands and their children: your mother was an Hittite, and your
father an Amorite.

16:46 And thine elder sister is Samaria, she and her daughters that
dwell at thy left hand: and thy younger sister, that dwelleth at thy
right hand, is Sodom and her daughters.

16:47 Yet hast thou not walked after their ways, nor done after their
abominations: but, as if that were a very little thing, thou wast
corrupted more than they in all thy ways.

16:48 As I live, saith the Lord GOD, Sodom thy sister hath not done,
she nor her daughters, as thou hast done, thou and thy daughters.

16:49 Behold, this was the iniquity of thy sister Sodom, pride,
fulness of bread, and abundance of idleness was in her and in her
daughters, neither did she strengthen the hand of the poor and needy.

16:50 And they were haughty, and committed abomination before me:
therefore I took them away as I saw good.

16:51 Neither hath Samaria committed half of thy sins; but thou hast
multiplied thine abominations more than they, and hast justified thy
sisters in all thine abominations which thou hast done.

16:52 Thou also, which hast judged thy sisters, bear thine own shame
for thy sins that thou hast committed more abominable than they: they
are more righteous than thou: yea, be thou confounded also, and bear
thy shame, in that thou hast justified thy sisters.

16:53 When I shall bring again their captivity, the captivity of Sodom
and her daughters, and the captivity of Samaria and her daughters,
then will I bring again the captivity of thy captives in the midst of
them: 16:54 That thou mayest bear thine own shame, and mayest be
confounded in all that thou hast done, in that thou art a comfort unto
them.

16:55 When thy sisters, Sodom and her daughters, shall return to their
former estate, and Samaria and her daughters shall return to their
former estate, then thou and thy daughters shall return to your former
estate.

16:56 For thy sister Sodom was not mentioned by thy mouth in the day
of thy pride, 16:57 Before thy wickedness was discovered, as at the
time of thy reproach of the daughters of Syria, and all that are round
about her, the daughters of the Philistines, which despise thee round
about.

16:58 Thou hast borne thy lewdness and thine abominations, saith the
LORD.

16:59 For thus saith the Lord GOD; I will even deal with thee as thou
hast done, which hast despised the oath in breaking the covenant.

16:60 Nevertheless I will remember my covenant with thee in the days
of thy youth, and I will establish unto thee an everlasting covenant.

16:61 Then thou shalt remember thy ways, and be ashamed, when thou
shalt receive thy sisters, thine elder and thy younger: and I will
give them unto thee for daughters, but not by thy covenant.

16:62 And I will establish my covenant with thee; and thou shalt know
that I am the LORD: 16:63 That thou mayest remember, and be
confounded, and never open thy mouth any more because of thy shame,
when I am pacified toward thee for all that thou hast done, saith the
Lord GOD.

17:1 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 17:2 Son of man,
put forth a riddle, and speak a parable unto the house of Israel; 17:3
And say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; A great eagle with great wings,
longwinged, full of feathers, which had divers colours, came unto
Lebanon, and took the highest branch of the cedar: 17:4 He cropped off
the top of his young twigs, and carried it into a land of traffick; he
set it in a city of merchants.

17:5 He took also of the seed of the land, and planted it in a
fruitful field; he placed it by great waters, and set it as a willow
tree.

17:6 And it grew, and became a spreading vine of low stature, whose
branches turned toward him, and the roots thereof were under him: so
it became a vine, and brought forth branches, and shot forth sprigs.

17:7 There was also another great eagle with great wings and many
feathers: and, behold, this vine did bend her roots toward him, and
shot forth her branches toward him, that he might water it by the
furrows of her plantation.

17:8 It was planted in a good soil by great waters, that it might
bring forth branches, and that it might bear fruit, that it might be a
goodly vine.

17:9 Say thou, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Shall it prosper? shall he not
pull up the roots thereof, and cut off the fruit thereof, that it
wither? it shall wither in all the leaves of her spring, even without
great power or many people to pluck it up by the roots thereof.

17:10 Yea, behold, being planted, shall it prosper? shall it not
utterly wither, when the east wind toucheth it? it shall wither in the
furrows where it grew.

17:11 Moreover the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 17:12 Say
now to the rebellious house, Know ye not what these things mean?  tell
them, Behold, the king of Babylon is come to Jerusalem, and hath taken
the king thereof, and the princes thereof, and led them with him to
Babylon; 17:13 And hath taken of the king's seed, and made a covenant
with him, and hath taken an oath of him: he hath also taken the mighty
of the land: 17:14 That the kingdom might be base, that it might not
lift itself up, but that by keeping of his covenant it might stand.

17:15 But he rebelled against him in sending his ambassadors into
Egypt, that they might give him horses and much people. Shall he
prosper? shall he escape that doeth such things? or shall he break the
covenant, and be delivered?  17:16 As I live, saith the Lord GOD,
surely in the place where the king dwelleth that made him king, whose
oath he despised, and whose covenant he brake, even with him in the
midst of Babylon he shall die.

17:17 Neither shall Pharaoh with his mighty army and great company
make for him in the war, by casting up mounts, and building forts, to
cut off many persons: 17:18 Seeing he despised the oath by breaking
the covenant, when, lo, he had given his hand, and hath done all these
things, he shall not escape.

17:19 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; As I live, surely mine oath
that he hath despised, and my covenant that he hath broken, even it
will I recompense upon his own head.

17:20 And I will spread my net upon him, and he shall be taken in my
snare, and I will bring him to Babylon, and will plead with him there
for his trespass that he hath trespassed against me.

17:21 And all his fugitives with all his bands shall fall by the
sword, and they that remain shall be scattered toward all winds: and
ye shall know that I the LORD have spoken it.

17:22 Thus saith the Lord GOD; I will also take of the highest branch
of the high cedar, and will set it; I will crop off from the top of
his young twigs a tender one, and will plant it upon an high mountain
and eminent: 17:23 In the mountain of the height of Israel will I
plant it: and it shall bring forth boughs, and bear fruit, and be a
goodly cedar: and under it shall dwell all fowl of every wing; in the
shadow of the branches thereof shall they dwell.

17:24 And all the trees of the field shall know that I the LORD have
brought down the high tree, have exalted the low tree, have dried up
the green tree, and have made the dry tree to flourish: I the LORD
have spoken and have done it.

18:1 The word of the LORD came unto me again, saying, 18:2 What mean
ye, that ye use this proverb concerning the land of Israel, saying,
The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the children's teeth are set
on edge?  18:3 As I live, saith the Lord GOD, ye shall not have
occasion any more to use this proverb in Israel.

18:4 Behold, all souls are mine; as the soul of the father, so also
the soul of the son is mine: the soul that sinneth, it shall die.

18:5 But if a man be just, and do that which is lawful and right, 18:6
And hath not eaten upon the mountains, neither hath lifted up his eyes
to the idols of the house of Israel, neither hath defiled his
neighbour's wife, neither hath come near to a menstruous woman, 18:7
And hath not oppressed any, but hath restored to the debtor his
pledge, hath spoiled none by violence, hath given his bread to the
hungry, and hath covered the naked with a garment; 18:8 He that hath
not given forth upon usury, neither hath taken any increase, that hath
withdrawn his hand from iniquity, hath executed true judgment between
man and man, 18:9 Hath walked in my statutes, and hath kept my
judgments, to deal truly; he is just, he shall surely live, saith the
Lord GOD.

18:10 If he beget a son that is a robber, a shedder of blood, and that
doeth the like to any one of these things, 18:11 And that doeth not
any of those duties, but even hath eaten upon the mountains, and
defiled his neighbour's wife, 18:12 Hath oppressed the poor and needy,
hath spoiled by violence, hath not restored the pledge, and hath
lifted up his eyes to the idols, hath committed abomination, 18:13
Hath given forth upon usury, and hath taken increase: shall he then
live? he shall not live: he hath done all these abominations; he shall
surely die; his blood shall be upon him.

18:14 Now, lo, if he beget a son, that seeth all his father's sins
which he hath done, and considereth, and doeth not such like, 18:15
That hath not eaten upon the mountains, neither hath lifted up his
eyes to the idols of the house of Israel, hath not defiled his
neighbour's wife, 18:16 Neither hath oppressed any, hath not
withholden the pledge, neither hath spoiled by violence, but hath
given his bread to the hungry, and hath covered the naked with a
garment, 18:17 That hath taken off his hand from the poor, that hath
not received usury nor increase, hath executed my judgments, hath
walked in my statutes; he shall not die for the iniquity of his
father, he shall surely live.

18:18 As for his father, because he cruelly oppressed, spoiled his
brother by violence, and did that which is not good among his people,
lo, even he shall die in his iniquity.

18:19 Yet say ye, Why? doth not the son bear the iniquity of the
father?  When the son hath done that which is lawful and right, and
hath kept all my statutes, and hath done them, he shall surely live.

18:20 The soul that sinneth, it shall die. The son shall not bear the
iniquity of the father, neither shall the father bear the iniquity of
the son: the righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and the
wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him.

18:21 But if the wicked will turn from all his sins that he hath
committed, and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and
right, he shall surely live, he shall not die.

18:22 All his transgressions that he hath committed, they shall not be
mentioned unto him: in his righteousness that he hath done he shall
live.

18:23 Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should die? saith the
Lord GOD: and not that he should return from his ways, and live?
18:24 But when the righteous turneth away from his righteousness, and
committeth iniquity, and doeth according to all the abominations that
the wicked man doeth, shall he live? All his righteousness that he
hath done shall not be mentioned: in his trespass that he hath
trespassed, and in his sin that he hath sinned, in them shall he die.

18:25 Yet ye say, The way of the LORD is not equal. Hear now, O house
of Israel; Is not my way equal? are not your ways unequal?  18:26 When
a righteous man turneth away from his righteousness, and committeth
iniquity, and dieth in them; for his iniquity that he hath done shall
he die.

18:27 Again, when the wicked man turneth away from his wickedness that
he hath committed, and doeth that which is lawful and right, he shall
save his soul alive.

18:28 Because he considereth, and turneth away from all his
transgressions that he hath committed, he shall surely live, he shall
not die.

18:29 Yet saith the house of Israel, The way of the LORD is not equal.
O house of Israel, are not my ways equal? are not your ways unequal?
18:30 Therefore I will judge you, O house of Israel, every one
according to his ways, saith the Lord GOD. Repent, and turn yourselves
from all your transgressions; so iniquity shall not be your ruin.

18:31 Cast away from you all your transgressions, whereby ye have
transgressed; and make you a new heart and a new spirit: for why will
ye die, O house of Israel?  18:32 For I have no pleasure in the death
of him that dieth, saith the Lord GOD: wherefore turn yourselves, and
live ye.

19:1 Moreover take thou up a lamentation for the princes of Israel,
19:2 And say, What is thy mother? A lioness: she lay down among lions,
she nourished her whelps among young lions.

19:3 And she brought up one of her whelps: it became a young lion, and
it learned to catch the prey; it devoured men.

19:4 The nations also heard of him; he was taken in their pit, and
they brought him with chains unto the land of Egypt.

19:5 Now when she saw that she had waited, and her hope was lost, then
she took another of her whelps, and made him a young lion.

19:6 And he went up and down among the lions, he became a young lion,
and learned to catch the prey, and devoured men.

19:7 And he knew their desolate palaces, and he laid waste their
cities; and the land was desolate, and the fulness thereof, by the
noise of his roaring.

19:8 Then the nations set against him on every side from the
provinces, and spread their net over him: he was taken in their pit.

19:9 And they put him in ward in chains, and brought him to the king
of Babylon: they brought him into holds, that his voice should no more
be heard upon the mountains of Israel.

19:10 Thy mother is like a vine in thy blood, planted by the waters:
she was fruitful and full of branches by reason of many waters.

19:11 And she had strong rods for the sceptres of them that bare rule,
and her stature was exalted among the thick branches, and she appeared
in her height with the multitude of her branches.

19:12 But she was plucked up in fury, she was cast down to the ground,
and the east wind dried up her fruit: her strong rods were broken and
withered; the fire consumed them.

19:13 And now she is planted in the wilderness, in a dry and thirsty
ground.

19:14 And fire is gone out of a rod of her branches, which hath
devoured her fruit, so that she hath no strong rod to be a sceptre to
rule. This is a lamentation, and shall be for a lamentation.

20:1 And it came to pass in the seventh year, in the fifth month, the
tenth day of the month, that certain of the elders of Israel came to
enquire of the LORD, and sat before me.

20:2 Then came the word of the LORD unto me, saying, 20:3 Son of man,
speak unto the elders of Israel, and say unto them, Thus saith the
Lord GOD; Are ye come to enquire of me? As I live, saith the Lord GOD,
I will not be enquired of by you.

20:4 Wilt thou judge them, son of man, wilt thou judge them? cause
them to know the abominations of their fathers: 20:5 And say unto
them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; In the day when I chose Israel, and
lifted up mine hand unto the seed of the house of Jacob, and made
myself known unto them in the land of Egypt, when I lifted up mine
hand unto them, saying, I am the LORD your God; 20:6 In the day that I
lifted up mine hand unto them, to bring them forth of the land of
Egypt into a land that I had espied for them, flowing with milk and
honey, which is the glory of all lands: 20:7 Then said I unto them,
Cast ye away every man the abominations of his eyes, and defile not
yourselves with the idols of Egypt: I am the LORD your God.

20:8 But they rebelled against me, and would not hearken unto me: they
did not every man cast away the abominations of their eyes, neither
did they forsake the idols of Egypt: then I said, I will pour out my
fury upon them, to accomplish my anger against them in the midst of
the land of Egypt.

20:9 But I wrought for my name's sake, that it should not be polluted
before the heathen, among whom they were, in whose sight I made myself
known unto them, in bringing them forth out of the land of Egypt.

20:10 Wherefore I caused them to go forth out of the land of Egypt,
and brought them into the wilderness.

20:11 And I gave them my statutes, and shewed them my judgments, which
if a man do, he shall even live in them.

20:12 Moreover also I gave them my sabbaths, to be a sign between me
and them, that they might know that I am the LORD that sanctify them.

20:13 But the house of Israel rebelled against me in the wilderness:
they walked not in my statutes, and they despised my judgments, which
if a man do, he shall even live in them; and my sabbaths they greatly
polluted: then I said, I would pour out my fury upon them in the
wilderness, to consume them.

20:14 But I wrought for my name's sake, that it should not be polluted
before the heathen, in whose sight I brought them out.

20:15 Yet also I lifted up my hand unto them in the wilderness, that I
would not bring them into the land which I had given them, flowing
with milk and honey, which is the glory of all lands; 20:16 Because
they despised my judgments, and walked not in my statutes, but
polluted my sabbaths: for their heart went after their idols.

20:17 Nevertheless mine eye spared them from destroying them, neither
did I make an end of them in the wilderness.

20:18 But I said unto their children in the wilderness, Walk ye not in
the statutes of your fathers, neither observe their judgments, nor
defile yourselves with their idols: 20:19 I am the LORD your God; walk
in my statutes, and keep my judgments, and do them; 20:20 And hallow
my sabbaths; and they shall be a sign between me and you, that ye may
know that I am the LORD your God.

20:21 Notwithstanding the children rebelled against me: they walked
not in my statutes, neither kept my judgments to do them, which if a
man do, he shall even live in them; they polluted my sabbaths: then I
said, I would pour out my fury upon them, to accomplish my anger
against them in the wilderness.

20:22 Nevertheless I withdrew mine hand, and wrought for my name's
sake, that it should not be polluted in the sight of the heathen, in
whose sight I brought them forth.

20:23 I lifted up mine hand unto them also in the wilderness, that I
would scatter them among the heathen, and disperse them through the
countries; 20:24 Because they had not executed my judgments, but had
despised my statutes, and had polluted my sabbaths, and their eyes
were after their fathers' idols.

20:25 Wherefore I gave them also statutes that were not good, and
judgments whereby they should not live; 20:26 And I polluted them in
their own gifts, in that they caused to pass through the fire all that
openeth the womb, that I might make them desolate, to the end that
they might know that I am the LORD.

20:27 Therefore, son of man, speak unto the house of Israel, and say
unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Yet in this your fathers have
blasphemed me, in that they have committed a trespass against me.

20:28 For when I had brought them into the land, for the which I
lifted up mine hand to give it to them, then they saw every high hill,
and all the thick trees, and they offered there their sacrifices, and
there they presented the provocation of their offering: there also
they made their sweet savour, and poured out there their drink
offerings.

20:29 Then I said unto them, What is the high place whereunto ye go?
And the name whereof is called Bamah unto this day.

20:30 Wherefore say unto the house of Israel, Thus saith the Lord GOD;
Are ye polluted after the manner of your fathers? and commit ye
whoredom after their abominations?  20:31 For when ye offer your
gifts, when ye make your sons to pass through the fire, ye pollute
yourselves with all your idols, even unto this day: and shall I be
enquired of by you, O house of Israel? As I live, saith the Lord GOD,
I will not be enquired of by you.

20:32 And that which cometh into your mind shall not be at all, that
ye say, We will be as the heathen, as the families of the countries,
to serve wood and stone.

20:33 As I live, saith the Lord GOD, surely with a mighty hand, and
with a stretched out arm, and with fury poured out, will I rule over
you: 20:34 And I will bring you out from the people, and will gather
you out of the countries wherein ye are scattered, with a mighty hand,
and with a stretched out arm, and with fury poured out.

20:35 And I will bring you into the wilderness of the people, and
there will I plead with you face to face.

20:36 Like as I pleaded with your fathers in the wilderness of the
land of Egypt, so will I plead with you, saith the Lord GOD.

20:37 And I will cause you to pass under the rod, and I will bring you
into the bond of the covenant: 20:38 And I will purge out from among
you the rebels, and them that transgress against me: I will bring them
forth out of the country where they sojourn, and they shall not enter
into the land of Israel: and ye shall know that I am the LORD.

20:39 As for you, O house of Israel, thus saith the Lord GOD; Go ye,
serve ye every one his idols, and hereafter also, if ye will not
hearken unto me: but pollute ye my holy name no more with your gifts,
and with your idols.

20:40 For in mine holy mountain, in the mountain of the height of
Israel, saith the Lord GOD, there shall all the house of Israel, all
of them in the land, serve me: there will I accept them, and there
will I require your offerings, and the firstfruits of your oblations,
with all your holy things.

20:41 I will accept you with your sweet savour, when I bring you out
from the people, and gather you out of the countries wherein ye have
been scattered; and I will be sanctified in you before the heathen.

20:42 And ye shall know that I am the LORD, when I shall bring you
into the land of Israel, into the country for the which I lifted up
mine hand to give it to your fathers.

20:43 And there shall ye remember your ways, and all your doings,
wherein ye have been defiled; and ye shall lothe yourselves in your
own sight for all your evils that ye have committed.

20:44 And ye shall know that I am the LORD when I have wrought with
you for my name's sake, not according to your wicked ways, nor
according to your corrupt doings, O ye house of Israel, saith the Lord
GOD.

20:45 Moreover the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 20:46 Son of
man, set thy face toward the south, and drop thy word toward the
south, and prophesy against the forest of the south field; 20:47 And
say to the forest of the south, Hear the word of the LORD; Thus saith
the Lord GOD; Behold, I will kindle a fire in thee, and it shall
devour every green tree in thee, and every dry tree: the flaming flame
shall not be quenched, and all faces from the south to the north shall
be burned therein.

20:48 And all flesh shall see that I the LORD have kindled it: it
shall not be quenched.

20:49 Then said I, Ah Lord GOD! they say of me, Doth he not speak
parables?  21:1 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 21:2
Son of man, set thy face toward Jerusalem, and drop thy word toward
the holy places, and prophesy against the land of Israel, 21:3 And say
to the land of Israel, Thus saith the LORD; Behold, I am against thee,
and will draw forth my sword out of his sheath, and will cut off from
thee the righteous and the wicked.

21:4 Seeing then that I will cut off from thee the righteous and the
wicked, therefore shall my sword go forth out of his sheath against
all flesh from the south to the north: 21:5 That all flesh may know
that I the LORD have drawn forth my sword out of his sheath: it shall
not return any more.

21:6 Sigh therefore, thou son of man, with the breaking of thy loins;
and with bitterness sigh before their eyes.

21:7 And it shall be, when they say unto thee, Wherefore sighest thou?
that thou shalt answer, For the tidings; because it cometh: and every
heart shall melt, and all hands shall be feeble, and every spirit
shall faint, and all knees shall be weak as water: behold, it cometh,
and shall be brought to pass, saith the Lord GOD.

21:8 Again the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 21:9 Son of man,
prophesy, and say, Thus saith the LORD; Say, A sword, a sword is
sharpened, and also furbished: 21:10 It is sharpened to make a sore
slaughter; it is furbished that it may glitter: should we then make
mirth? it contemneth the rod of my son, as every tree.

21:11 And he hath given it to be furbished, that it may be handled:
this sword is sharpened, and it is furbished, to give it into the hand
of the slayer.

21:12 Cry and howl, son of man: for it shall be upon my people, it
shall be upon all the princes of Israel: terrors by reason of the
sword shall be upon my people: smite therefore upon thy thigh.

21:13 Because it is a trial, and what if the sword contemn even the
rod?  it shall be no more, saith the Lord GOD.

21:14 Thou therefore, son of man, prophesy, and smite thine hands
together. and let the sword be doubled the third time, the sword of
the slain: it is the sword of the great men that are slain, which
entereth into their privy chambers.

21:15 I have set the point of the sword against all their gates, that
their heart may faint, and their ruins be multiplied: ah! it is made
bright, it is wrapped up for the slaughter.

21:16 Go thee one way or other, either on the right hand, or on the
left, whithersoever thy face is set.

21:17 I will also smite mine hands together, and I will cause my fury
to rest: I the LORD have said it.

21:18 The word of the LORD came unto me again, saying, 21:19 Also,
thou son of man, appoint thee two ways, that the sword of the king of
Babylon may come: both twain shall come forth out of one land: and
choose thou a place, choose it at the head of the way to the city.

21:20 Appoint a way, that the sword may come to Rabbath of the
Ammonites, and to Judah in Jerusalem the defenced.

21:21 For the king of Babylon stood at the parting of the way, at the
head of the two ways, to use divination: he made his arrows bright, he
consulted with images, he looked in the liver.

21:22 At his right hand was the divination for Jerusalem, to appoint
captains, to open the mouth in the slaughter, to lift up the voice
with shouting, to appoint battering rams against the gates, to cast a
mount, and to build a fort.

21:23 And it shall be unto them as a false divination in their sight,
to them that have sworn oaths: but he will call to remembrance the
iniquity, that they may be taken.

21:24 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Because ye have made your
iniquity to be remembered, in that your transgressions are discovered,
so that in all your doings your sins do appear; because, I say, that
ye are come to remembrance, ye shall be taken with the hand.

21:25 And thou, profane wicked prince of Israel, whose day is come,
when iniquity shall have an end, 21:26 Thus saith the Lord GOD; Remove
the diadem, and take off the crown: this shall not be the same: exalt
him that is low, and abase him that is high.

21:27 I will overturn, overturn, overturn, it: and it shall be no
more, until he come whose right it is; and I will give it him.

21:28 And thou, son of man, prophesy and say, Thus saith the Lord GOD
concerning the Ammonites, and concerning their reproach; even say
thou, The sword, the sword is drawn: for the slaughter it is
furbished, to consume because of the glittering: 21:29 Whiles they see
vanity unto thee, whiles they divine a lie unto thee, to bring thee
upon the necks of them that are slain, of the wicked, whose day is
come, when their iniquity shall have an end.

21:30 Shall I cause it to return into his sheath? I will judge thee in
the place where thou wast created, in the land of thy nativity.

21:31 And I will pour out mine indignation upon thee, I will blow
against thee in the fire of my wrath, and deliver thee into the hand
of brutish men, and skilful to destroy.

21:32 Thou shalt be for fuel to the fire; thy blood shall be in the
midst of the land; thou shalt be no more remembered: for I the LORD
have spoken it.

22:1 Moreover the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 22:2 Now,
thou son of man, wilt thou judge, wilt thou judge the bloody city?
yea, thou shalt shew her all her abominations.

22:3 Then say thou, Thus saith the Lord GOD, The city sheddeth blood
in the midst of it, that her time may come, and maketh idols against
herself to defile herself.

22:4 Thou art become guilty in thy blood that thou hast shed; and hast
defiled thyself in thine idols which thou hast made; and thou hast
caused thy days to draw near, and art come even unto thy years:
therefore have I made thee a reproach unto the heathen, and a mocking
to all countries.

22:5 Those that be near, and those that be far from thee, shall mock
thee, which art infamous and much vexed.

22:6 Behold, the princes of Israel, every one were in thee to their
power to shed blood.

22:7 In thee have they set light by father and mother: in the midst of
thee have they dealt by oppression with the stranger: in thee have
they vexed the fatherless and the widow.

22:8 Thou hast despised mine holy things, and hast profaned my
sabbaths.

22:9 In thee are men that carry tales to shed blood: and in thee they
eat upon the mountains: in the midst of thee they commit lewdness.

22:10 In thee have they discovered their fathers' nakedness: in thee
have they humbled her that was set apart for pollution.

22:11 And one hath committed abomination with his neighbour's wife;
and another hath lewdly defiled his daughter in law; and another in
thee hath humbled his sister, his father's daughter.

22:12 In thee have they taken gifts to shed blood; thou hast taken
usury and increase, and thou hast greedily gained of thy neighbours by
extortion, and hast forgotten me, saith the Lord GOD.

22:13 Behold, therefore I have smitten mine hand at thy dishonest gain
which thou hast made, and at thy blood which hath been in the midst of
thee.

22:14 Can thine heart endure, or can thine hands be strong, in the
days that I shall deal with thee? I the LORD have spoken it, and will
do it.

22:15 And I will scatter thee among the heathen, and disperse thee in
the countries, and will consume thy filthiness out of thee.

22:16 And thou shalt take thine inheritance in thyself in the sight of
the heathen, and thou shalt know that I am the LORD.

22:17 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 22:18 Son of man,
the house of Israel is to me become dross: all they are brass, and
tin, and iron, and lead, in the midst of the furnace; they are even
the dross of silver.

22:19 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Because ye are all become
dross, behold, therefore I will gather you into the midst of
Jerusalem.

22:20 As they gather silver, and brass, and iron, and lead, and tin,
into the midst of the furnace, to blow the fire upon it, to melt it;
so will I gather you in mine anger and in my fury, and I will leave
you there, and melt you.

22:21 Yea, I will gather you, and blow upon you in the fire of my
wrath, and ye shall be melted in the midst therof.

22:22 As silver is melted in the midst of the furnace, so shall ye be
melted in the midst thereof; and ye shall know that I the LORD have
poured out my fury upon you.

22:23 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 22:24 Son of man,
say unto her, Thou art the land that is not cleansed, nor rained upon
in the day of indignation.

22:25 There is a conspiracy of her prophets in the midst thereof, like
a roaring lion ravening the prey; they have devoured souls; they have
taken the treasure and precious things; they have made her many widows
in the midst thereof.

22:26 Her priests have violated my law, and have profaned mine holy
things: they have put no difference between the holy and profane,
neither have they shewed difference between the unclean and the clean,
and have hid their eyes from my sabbaths, and I am profaned among
them.

22:27 Her princes in the midst thereof are like wolves ravening the
prey, to shed blood, and to destroy souls, to get dishonest gain.

22:28 And her prophets have daubed them with untempered morter, seeing
vanity, and divining lies unto them, saying, Thus saith the Lord GOD,
when the LORD hath not spoken.

22:29 The people of the land have used oppression, and exercised
robbery, and have vexed the poor and needy: yea, they have oppressed
the stranger wrongfully.

22:30 And I sought for a man among them, that should make up the
hedge, and stand in the gap before me for the land, that I should not
destroy it: but I found none.

22:31 Therefore have I poured out mine indignation upon them; I have
consumed them with the fire of my wrath: their own way have I
recompensed upon their heads, saith the Lord GOD.

23:1 The word of the LORD came again unto me, saying, 23:2 Son of man,
there were two women, the daughters of one mother: 23:3 And they
committed whoredoms in Egypt; they committed whoredoms in their youth:
there were their breasts pressed, and there they bruised the teats of
their virginity.

23:4 And the names of them were Aholah the elder, and Aholibah her
sister: and they were mine, and they bare sons and daughters. Thus
were their names; Samaria is Aholah, and Jerusalem Aholibah.

23:5 And Aholah played the harlot when she was mine; and she doted on
her lovers, on the Assyrians her neighbours, 23:6 Which were clothed
with blue, captains and rulers, all of them desirable young men,
horsemen riding upon horses.

23:7 Thus she committed her whoredoms with them, with all them that
were the chosen men of Assyria, and with all on whom she doted: with
all their idols she defiled herself.

23:8 Neither left she her whoredoms brought from Egypt: for in her
youth they lay with her, and they bruised the breasts of her
virginity, and poured their whoredom upon her.

23:9 Wherefore I have delivered her into the hand of her lovers, into
the hand of the Assyrians, upon whom she doted.

23:10 These discovered her nakedness: they took her sons and her
daughters, and slew her with the sword: and she became famous among
women; for they had executed judgment upon her.

23:11 And when her sister Aholibah saw this, she was more corrupt in
her inordinate love than she, and in her whoredoms more than her
sister in her whoredoms.

23:12 She doted upon the Assyrians her neighbours, captains and rulers
clothed most gorgeously, horsemen riding upon horses, all of them
desirable young men.

23:13 Then I saw that she was defiled, that they took both one way,
23:14 And that she increased her whoredoms: for when she saw men
pourtrayed upon the wall, the images of the Chaldeans pourtrayed with
vermilion, 23:15 Girded with girdles upon their loins, exceeding in
dyed attire upon their heads, all of them princes to look to, after
the manner of the Babylonians of Chaldea, the land of their nativity:
23:16 And as soon as she saw them with her eyes, she doted upon them,
and sent messengers unto them into Chaldea.

23:17 And the Babylonians came to her into the bed of love, and they
defiled her with their whoredom, and she was polluted with them, and
her mind was alienated from them.

23:18 So she discovered her whoredoms, and discovered her nakedness:
then my mind was alienated from her, like as my mind was alienated
from her sister.

23:19 Yet she multiplied her whoredoms, in calling to remembrance the
days of her youth, wherein she had played the harlot in the land of
Egypt.

23:20 For she doted upon their paramours, whose flesh is as the flesh
of asses, and whose issue is like the issue of horses.

23:21 Thus thou calledst to remembrance the lewdness of thy youth, in
bruising thy teats by the Egyptians for the paps of thy youth.

23:22 Therefore, O Aholibah, thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I will
raise up thy lovers against thee, from whom thy mind is alienated, and
I will bring them against thee on every side; 23:23 The Babylonians,
and all the Chaldeans, Pekod, and Shoa, and Koa, and all the Assyrians
with them: all of them desirable young men, captains and rulers, great
lords and renowned, all of them riding upon horses.

23:24 And they shall come against thee with chariots, wagons, and
wheels, and with an assembly of people, which shall set against thee
buckler and shield and helmet round about: and I will set judgment
before them, and they shall judge thee according to their judgments.

23:25 And I will set my jealousy against thee, and they shall deal
furiously with thee: they shall take away thy nose and thine ears; and
thy remnant shall fall by the sword: they shall take thy sons and thy
daughters; and thy residue shall be devoured by the fire.

23:26 They shall also strip thee out of thy clothes, and take away thy
fair jewels.

23:27 Thus will I make thy lewdness to cease from thee, and thy
whoredom brought from the land of Egypt: so that thou shalt not lift
up thine eyes unto them, nor remember Egypt any more.

23:28 For thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I will deliver thee into
the hand of them whom thou hatest, into the hand of them from whom thy
mind is alienated: 23:29 And they shall deal with thee hatefully, and
shall take away all thy labour, and shall leave thee naked and bare:
and the nakedness of thy whoredoms shall be discovered, both thy
lewdness and thy whoredoms.

23:30 I will do these things unto thee, because thou hast gone a
whoring after the heathen, and because thou art polluted with their
idols.

23:31 Thou hast walked in the way of thy sister; therefore will I give
her cup into thine hand.

23:32 Thus saith the Lord GOD; Thou shalt drink of thy sister's cup
deep and large: thou shalt be laughed to scorn and had in derision; it
containeth much.

23:33 Thou shalt be filled with drunkenness and sorrow, with the cup
of astonishment and desolation, with the cup of thy sister Samaria.

23:34 Thou shalt even drink it and suck it out, and thou shalt break
the sherds thereof, and pluck off thine own breasts: for I have spoken
it, saith the Lord GOD.

23:35 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Because thou hast forgotten
me, and cast me behind thy back, therefore bear thou also thy lewdness
and thy whoredoms.

23:36 The LORD said moreover unto me; Son of man, wilt thou judge
Aholah and Aholibah? yea, declare unto them their abominations; 23:37
That they have committed adultery, and blood is in their hands, and
with their idols have they committed adultery, and have also caused
their sons, whom they bare unto me, to pass for them through the fire,
to devour them.

23:38 Moreover this they have done unto me: they have defiled my
sanctuary in the same day, and have profaned my sabbaths.

23:39 For when they had slain their children to their idols, then they
came the same day into my sanctuary to profane it; and, lo, thus have
they done in the midst of mine house.

23:40 And furthermore, that ye have sent for men to come from far,
unto whom a messenger was sent; and, lo, they came: for whom thou
didst wash thyself, paintedst thy eyes, and deckedst thyself with
ornaments, 23:41 And satest upon a stately bed, and a table prepared
before it, whereupon thou hast set mine incense and mine oil.

23:42 And a voice of a multitude being at ease was with her: and with
the men of the common sort were brought Sabeans from the wilderness,
which put bracelets upon their hands, and beautiful crowns upon their
heads.

23:43 Then said I unto her that was old in adulteries, Will they now
commit whoredoms with her, and she with them?  23:44 Yet they went in
unto her, as they go in unto a woman that playeth the harlot: so went
they in unto Aholah and unto Aholibah, the lewd women.

23:45 And the righteous men, they shall judge them after the manner of
adulteresses, and after the manner of women that shed blood; because
they are adulteresses, and blood is in their hands.

23:46 For thus saith the Lord GOD; I will bring up a company upon
them, and will give them to be removed and spoiled.

23:47 And the company shall stone them with stones, and dispatch them
with their swords; they shall slay their sons and their daughters, and
burn up their houses with fire.

23:48 Thus will I cause lewdness to cease out of the land, that all
women may be taught not to do after your lewdness.

23:49 And they shall recompense your lewdness upon you, and ye shall
bear the sins of your idols: and ye shall know that I am the Lord GOD.

24:1 Again in the ninth year, in the tenth month, in the tenth day of
the month, the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 24:2 Son of man,
write thee the name of the day, even of this same day: the king of
Babylon set himself against Jerusalem this same day.

24:3 And utter a parable unto the rebellious house, and say unto them,
Thus saith the Lord GOD; Set on a pot, set it on, and also pour water
into it: 24:4 Gather the pieces thereof into it, even every good
piece, the thigh, and the shoulder; fill it with the choice bones.

24:5 Take the choice of the flock, and burn also the bones under it,
and make it boil well, and let them seethe the bones of it therein.

24:6 Wherefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Woe to the bloody city, to the
pot whose scum is therein, and whose scum is not gone out of it! bring
it out piece by piece; let no lot fall upon it.

24:7 For her blood is in the midst of her; she set it upon the top of
a rock; she poured it not upon the ground, to cover it with dust; 24:8
That it might cause fury to come up to take vengeance; I have set her
blood upon the top of a rock, that it should not be covered.

24:9 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Woe to the bloody city! I will
even make the pile for fire great.

24:10 Heap on wood, kindle the fire, consume the flesh, and spice it
well, and let the bones be burned.

24:11 Then set it empty upon the coals thereof, that the brass of it
may be hot, and may burn, and that the filthiness of it may be molten
in it, that the scum of it may be consumed.

24:12 She hath wearied herself with lies, and her great scum went not
forth out of her: her scum shall be in the fire.

24:13 In thy filthiness is lewdness: because I have purged thee, and
thou wast not purged, thou shalt not be purged from thy filthiness any
more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee.

24:14 I the LORD have spoken it: it shall come to pass, and I will do
it; I will not go back, neither will I spare, neither will I repent;
according to thy ways, and according to thy doings, shall they judge
thee, saith the Lord GOD.

24:15 Also the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 24:16 Son of
man, behold, I take away from thee the desire of thine eyes with a
stroke: yet neither shalt thou mourn nor weep, neither shall thy tears
run down.

24:17 Forbear to cry, make no mourning for the dead, bind the tire of
thine head upon thee, and put on thy shoes upon thy feet, and cover
not thy lips, and eat not the bread of men.

24:18 So I spake unto the people in the morning: and at even my wife
died; and I did in the morning as I was commanded.

24:19 And the people said unto me, Wilt thou not tell us what these
things are to us, that thou doest so?  24:20 Then I answered them, The
word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 24:21 Speak unto the house of
Israel, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I will profane my sanctuary,
the excellency of your strength, the desire of your eyes, and that
which your soul pitieth; and your sons and your daughters whom ye have
left shall fall by the sword.

24:22 And ye shall do as I have done: ye shall not cover your lips,
nor eat the bread of men.

24:23 And your tires shall be upon your heads, and your shoes upon
your feet: ye shall not mourn nor weep; but ye shall pine away for
your iniquities, and mourn one toward another.

24:24 Thus Ezekiel is unto you a sign: according to all that he hath
done shall ye do: and when this cometh, ye shall know that I am the
Lord GOD.

24:25 Also, thou son of man, shall it not be in the day when I take
from them their strength, the joy of their glory, the desire of their
eyes, and that whereupon they set their minds, their sons and their
daughters, 24:26 That he that escapeth in that day shall come unto
thee, to cause thee to hear it with thine ears?  24:27 In that day
shall thy mouth be opened to him which is escaped, and thou shalt
speak, and be no more dumb: and thou shalt be a sign unto them; and
they shall know that I am the LORD.

25:1 The word of the LORD came again unto me, saying, 25:2 Son of man,
set thy face against the Ammonites, and prophesy against them; 25:3
And say unto the Ammonites, Hear the word of the Lord GOD; Thus saith
the Lord GOD; Because thou saidst, Aha, against my sanctuary, when it
was profaned; and against the land of Israel, when it was desolate;
and against the house of Judah, when they went into captivity; 25:4
Behold, therefore I will deliver thee to the men of the east for a
possession, and they shall set their palaces in thee, and make their
dwellings in thee: they shall eat thy fruit, and they shall drink thy
milk.

25:5 And I will make Rabbah a stable for camels, and the Ammonites a
couching place for flocks: and ye shall know that I am the LORD.

25:6 For thus saith the Lord GOD; Because thou hast clapped thine
hands, and stamped with the feet, and rejoiced in heart with all thy
despite against the land of Israel; 25:7 Behold, therefore I will
stretch out mine hand upon thee, and will deliver thee for a spoil to
the heathen; and I will cut thee off from the people, and I will cause
thee to perish out of the countries: I will destroy thee; and thou
shalt know that I am the LORD.

25:8 Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because that Moab and Seir do say,
Behold, the house of Judah is like unto all the heathen; 25:9
Therefore, behold, I will open the side of Moab from the cities, from
his cities which are on his frontiers, the glory of the country,
Bethjeshimoth, Baalmeon, and Kiriathaim, 25:10 Unto the men of the
east with the Ammonites, and will give them in possession, that the
Ammonites may not be remembered among the nations.

25:11 And I will execute judgments upon Moab; and they shall know that
I am the LORD.

25:12 Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because that Edom hath dealt against
the house of Judah by taking vengeance, and hath greatly offended, and
revenged himself upon them; 25:13 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; I
will also stretch out mine hand upon Edom, and will cut off man and
beast from it; and I will make it desolate from Teman; and they of
Dedan shall fall by the sword.

25:14 And I will lay my vengeance upon Edom by the hand of my people
Israel: and they shall do in Edom according to mine anger and
according to my fury; and they shall know my vengeance, saith the Lord
GOD.

25:15 Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because the Philistines have dealt by
revenge, and have taken vengeance with a despiteful heart, to destroy
it for the old hatred; 25:16 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD;
Behold, I will stretch out mine hand upon the Philistines, and I will
cut off the Cherethims, and destroy the remnant of the sea coast.

25:17 And I will execute great vengeance upon them with furious
rebukes; and they shall know that I am the LORD, when I shall lay my
vengeance upon them.

26:1 And it came to pass in the eleventh year, in the first day of the
month, that the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 26:2 Son of
man, because that Tyrus hath said against Jerusalem, Aha, she is
broken that was the gates of the people: she is turned unto me: I
shall be replenished, now she is laid waste: 26:3 Therefore thus saith
the Lord GOD; Behold, I am against thee, O Tyrus, and will cause many
nations to come up against thee, as the sea causeth his waves to come
up.

26:4 And they shall destroy the walls of Tyrus, and break down her
towers: I will also scrape her dust from her, and make her like the
top of a rock.

26:5 It shall be a place for the spreading of nets in the midst of the
sea: for I have spoken it, saith the Lord GOD: and it shall become a
spoil to the nations.

26:6 And her daughters which are in the field shall be slain by the
sword; and they shall know that I am the LORD.

26:7 For thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I will bring upon Tyrus
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, a king of kings, from the north, with
horses, and with chariots, and with horsemen, and companies, and much
people.

26:8 He shall slay with the sword thy daughters in the field: and he
shall make a fort against thee, and cast a mount against thee, and
lift up the buckler against thee.

26:9 And he shall set engines of war against thy walls, and with his
axes he shall break down thy towers.

26:10 By reason of the abundance of his horses their dust shall cover
thee: thy walls shall shake at the noise of the horsemen, and of the
wheels, and of the chariots, when he shall enter into thy gates, as
men enter into a city wherein is made a breach.

26:11 With the hoofs of his horses shall he tread down all thy
streets: he shall slay thy people by the sword, and thy strong
garrisons shall go down to the ground.

26:12 And they shall make a spoil of thy riches, and make a prey of
thy merchandise: and they shall break down thy walls, and destroy thy
pleasant houses: and they shall lay thy stones and thy timber and thy
dust in the midst of the water.

26:13 And I will cause the noise of thy songs to cease; and the sound
of thy harps shall be no more heard.

26:14 And I will make thee like the top of a rock: thou shalt be a
place to spread nets upon; thou shalt be built no more: for I the LORD
have spoken it, saith the Lord GOD.

26:15 Thus saith the Lord GOD to Tyrus; Shall not the isles shake at
the sound of thy fall, when the wounded cry, when the slaughter is
made in the midst of thee?  26:16 Then all the princes of the sea
shall come down from their thrones, and lay away their robes, and put
off their broidered garments: they shall clothe themselves with
trembling; they shall sit upon the ground, and shall tremble at every
moment, and be astonished at thee.

26:17 And they shall take up a lamentation for thee, and say to thee,
How art thou destroyed, that wast inhabited of seafaring men, the
renowned city, which wast strong in the sea, she and her inhabitants,
which cause their terror to be on all that haunt it!  26:18 Now shall
the isles tremble in the day of thy fall; yea, the isles that are in
the sea shall be troubled at thy departure.

26:19 For thus saith the Lord GOD; When I shall make thee a desolate
city, like the cities that are not inhabited; when I shall bring up
the deep upon thee, and great waters shall cover thee; 26:20 When I
shall bring thee down with them that descend into the pit, with the
people of old time, and shall set thee in the low parts of the earth,
in places desolate of old, with them that go down to the pit, that
thou be not inhabited; and I shall set glory in the land of the
living; 26:21 I will make thee a terror, and thou shalt be no more:
though thou be sought for, yet shalt thou never be found again, saith
the Lord GOD.

27:1 The word of the LORD came again unto me, saying, 27:2 Now, thou
son of man, take up a lamentation for Tyrus; 27:3 And say unto Tyrus,
O thou that art situate at the entry of the sea, which art a merchant
of the people for many isles, Thus saith the Lord GOD; O Tyrus, thou
hast said, I am of perfect beauty.

27:4 Thy borders are in the midst of the seas, thy builders have
perfected thy beauty.

27:5 They have made all thy ship boards of fir trees of Senir: they
have taken cedars from Lebanon to make masts for thee.

27:6 Of the oaks of Bashan have they made thine oars; the company of
the Ashurites have made thy benches of ivory, brought out of the isles
of Chittim.

27:7 Fine linen with broidered work from Egypt was that which thou
spreadest forth to be thy sail; blue and purple from the isles of
Elishah was that which covered thee.

27:8 The inhabitants of Zidon and Arvad were thy mariners: thy wise
men, O Tyrus, that were in thee, were thy pilots.

27:9 The ancients of Gebal and the wise men thereof were in thee thy
calkers: all the ships of the sea with their mariners were in thee to
occupy thy merchandise.

27:10 They of Persia and of Lud and of Phut were in thine army, thy
men of war: they hanged the shield and helmet in thee; they set forth
thy comeliness.

27:11 The men of Arvad with thine army were upon thy walls round
about, and the Gammadims were in thy towers: they hanged their shields
upon thy walls round about; they have made thy beauty perfect.

27:12 Tarshish was thy merchant by reason of the multitude of all kind
of riches; with silver, iron, tin, and lead, they traded in thy fairs.

27:13 Javan, Tubal, and Meshech, they were thy merchants: they traded
the persons of men and vessels of brass in thy market.

27:14 They of the house of Togarmah traded in thy fairs with horses
and horsemen and mules.

27:15 The men of Dedan were thy merchants; many isles were the
merchandise of thine hand: they brought thee for a present horns of
ivory and ebony.

27:16 Syria was thy merchant by reason of the multitude of the wares
of thy making: they occupied in thy fairs with emeralds, purple, and
broidered work, and fine linen, and coral, and agate.

27:17 Judah, and the land of Israel, they were thy merchants: they
traded in thy market wheat of Minnith, and Pannag, and honey, and oil,
and balm.

27:18 Damascus was thy merchant in the multitude of the wares of thy
making, for the multitude of all riches; in the wine of Helbon, and
white wool.

27:19 Dan also and Javan going to and fro occupied in thy fairs:
bright iron, cassia, and calamus, were in thy market.

27:20 Dedan was thy merchant in precious clothes for chariots.

27:21 Arabia, and all the princes of Kedar, they occupied with thee in
lambs, and rams, and goats: in these were they thy merchants.

27:22 The merchants of Sheba and Raamah, they were thy merchants: they
occupied in thy fairs with chief of all spices, and with all precious
stones, and gold.

27:23 Haran, and Canneh, and Eden, the merchants of Sheba, Asshur, and
Chilmad, were thy merchants.

27:24 These were thy merchants in all sorts of things, in blue
clothes, and broidered work, and in chests of rich apparel, bound with
cords, and made of cedar, among thy merchandise.

27:25 The ships of Tarshish did sing of thee in thy market: and thou
wast replenished, and made very glorious in the midst of the seas.

27:26 Thy rowers have brought thee into great waters: the east wind
hath broken thee in the midst of the seas.

27:27 Thy riches, and thy fairs, thy merchandise, thy mariners, and
thy pilots, thy calkers, and the occupiers of thy merchandise, and all
thy men of war, that are in thee, and in all thy company which is in
the midst of thee, shall fall into the midst of the seas in the day of
thy ruin.

27:28 The suburbs shall shake at the sound of the cry of thy pilots.

27:29 And all that handle the oar, the mariners, and all the pilots of
the sea, shall come down from their ships, they shall stand upon the
land; 27:30 And shall cause their voice to be heard against thee, and
shall cry bitterly, and shall cast up dust upon their heads, they
shall wallow themselves in the ashes: 27:31 And they shall make
themselves utterly bald for thee, and gird them with sackcloth, and
they shall weep for thee with bitterness of heart and bitter wailing.

27:32 And in their wailing they shall take up a lamentation for thee,
and lament over thee, saying, What city is like Tyrus, like the
destroyed in the midst of the sea?  27:33 When thy wares went forth
out of the seas, thou filledst many people; thou didst enrich the
kings of the earth with the multitude of thy riches and of thy
merchandise.

27:34 In the time when thou shalt be broken by the seas in the depths
of the waters thy merchandise and all thy company in the midst of thee
shall fall.

27:35 All the inhabitants of the isles shall be astonished at thee,
and their kings shall be sore afraid, they shall be troubled in their
countenance.

27:36 The merchants among the people shall hiss at thee; thou shalt be
a terror, and never shalt be any more.

28:1 The word of the LORD came again unto me, saying, 28:2 Son of man,
say unto the prince of Tyrus, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because thine
heart is lifted up, and thou hast said, I am a God, I sit in the seat
of God, in the midst of the seas; yet thou art a man, and not God,
though thou set thine heart as the heart of God: 28:3 Behold, thou art
wiser than Daniel; there is no secret that they can hide from thee:
28:4 With thy wisdom and with thine understanding thou hast gotten
thee riches, and hast gotten gold and silver into thy treasures: 28:5
By thy great wisdom and by thy traffick hast thou increased thy
riches, and thine heart is lifted up because of thy riches: 28:6
Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Because thou hast set thine heart
as the heart of God; 28:7 Behold, therefore I will bring strangers
upon thee, the terrible of the nations: and they shall draw their
swords against the beauty of thy wisdom, and they shall defile thy
brightness.

28:8 They shall bring thee down to the pit, and thou shalt die the
deaths of them that are slain in the midst of the seas.

28:9 Wilt thou yet say before him that slayeth thee, I am God? but
thou shalt be a man, and no God, in the hand of him that slayeth thee.

28:10 Thou shalt die the deaths of the uncircumcised by the hand of
strangers: for I have spoken it, saith the Lord GOD.

28:11 Moreover the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 28:12 Son of
man, take up a lamentation upon the king of Tyrus, and say unto him,
Thus saith the Lord GOD; Thou sealest up the sum, full of wisdom, and
perfect in beauty.

28:13 Thou hast been in Eden the garden of God; every precious stone
was thy covering, the sardius, topaz, and the diamond, the beryl, the
onyx, and the jasper, the sapphire, the emerald, and the carbuncle,
and gold: the workmanship of thy tabrets and of thy pipes was prepared
in thee in the day that thou wast created.

28:14 Thou art the anointed cherub that covereth; and I have set thee
so: thou wast upon the holy mountain of God; thou hast walked up and
down in the midst of the stones of fire.

28:15 Thou wast perfect in thy ways from the day that thou wast
created, till iniquity was found in thee.

28:16 By the multitude of thy merchandise they have filled the midst
of thee with violence, and thou hast sinned: therefore I will cast
thee as profane out of the mountain of God: and I will destroy thee, O
covering cherub, from the midst of the stones of fire.

28:17 Thine heart was lifted up because of thy beauty, thou hast
corrupted thy wisdom by reason of thy brightness: I will cast thee to
the ground, I will lay thee before kings, that they may behold thee.

28:18 Thou hast defiled thy sanctuaries by the multitude of thine
iniquities, by the iniquity of thy traffick; therefore will I bring
forth a fire from the midst of thee, it shall devour thee, and I will
bring thee to ashes upon the earth in the sight of all them that
behold thee.

28:19 All they that know thee among the people shall be astonished at
thee: thou shalt be a terror, and never shalt thou be any more.

28:20 Again the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 28:21 Son of
man, set thy face against Zidon, and prophesy against it, 28:22 And
say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I am against thee, O Zidon; and
I will be glorified in the midst of thee: and they shall know that I
am the LORD, when I shall have executed judgments in her, and shall be
sanctified in her.

28:23 For I will send into her pestilence, and blood into her streets;
and the wounded shall be judged in the midst of her by the sword upon
her on every side; and they shall know that I am the LORD.

28:24 And there shall be no more a pricking brier unto the house of
Israel, nor any grieving thorn of all that are round about them, that
despised them; and they shall know that I am the Lord GOD.

28:25 Thus saith the Lord GOD; When I shall have gathered the house of
Israel from the people among whom they are scattered, and shall be
sanctified in them in the sight of the heathen, then shall they dwell
in their land that I have given to my servant Jacob.

28:26 And they shall dwell safely therein, and shall build houses, and
plant vineyards; yea, they shall dwell with confidence, when I have
executed judgments upon all those that despise them round about them;
and they shall know that I am the LORD their God.

29:1 In the tenth year, in the tenth month, in the twelfth day of the
month, the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 29:2 Son of man, set
thy face against Pharaoh king of Egypt, and prophesy against him, and
against all Egypt: 29:3 Speak, and say, Thus saith the Lord GOD;
Behold, I am against thee, Pharaoh king of Egypt, the great dragon
that lieth in the midst of his rivers, which hath said, My river is
mine own, and I have made it for myself.

29:4 But I will put hooks in thy jaws, and I will cause the fish of
thy rivers to stick unto thy scales, and I will bring thee up out of
the midst of thy rivers, and all the fish of thy rivers shall stick
unto thy scales.

29:5 And I will leave thee thrown into the wilderness, thee and all
the fish of thy rivers: thou shalt fall upon the open fields; thou
shalt not be brought together, nor gathered: I have given thee for
meat to the beasts of the field and to the fowls of the heaven.

29:6 And all the inhabitants of Egypt shall know that I am the LORD,
because they have been a staff of reed to the house of Israel.

29:7 When they took hold of thee by thy hand, thou didst break, and
rend all their shoulder: and when they leaned upon thee, thou brakest,
and madest all their loins to be at a stand.

29:8 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I will bring a sword
upon thee, and cut off man and beast out of thee.

29:9 And the land of Egypt shall be desolate and waste; and they shall
know that I am the LORD: because he hath said, The river is mine, and
I have made it.

29:10 Behold, therefore I am against thee, and against thy rivers, and
I will make the land of Egypt utterly waste and desolate, from the
tower of Syene even unto the border of Ethiopia.

29:11 No foot of man shall pass through it, nor foot of beast shall
pass through it, neither shall it be inhabited forty years.

29:12 And I will make the land of Egypt desolate in the midst of the
countries that are desolate, and her cities among the cities that are
laid waste shall be desolate forty years: and I will scatter the
Egyptians among the nations, and will disperse them through the
countries.

29:13 Yet thus saith the Lord GOD; At the end of forty years will I
gather the Egyptians from the people whither they were scattered:
29:14 And I will bring again the captivity of Egypt, and will cause
them to return into the land of Pathros, into the land of their
habitation; and they shall be there a base kingdom.

29:15 It shall be the basest of the kingdoms; neither shall it exalt
itself any more above the nations: for I will diminish them, that they
shall no more rule over the nations.

29:16 And it shall be no more the confidence of the house of Israel,
which bringeth their iniquity to remembrance, when they shall look
after them: but they shall know that I am the Lord GOD.

29:17 And it came to pass in the seven and twentieth year, in the
first month, in the first day of the month, the word of the LORD came
unto me, saying, 29:18 Son of man, Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon
caused his army to serve a great service against Tyrus: every head was
made bald, and every shoulder was peeled: yet had he no wages, nor his
army, for Tyrus, for the service that he had served against it: 29:19
Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I will give the land of
Egypt unto Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon; and he shall take her
multitude, and take her spoil, and take her prey; and it shall be the
wages for his army.

29:20 I have given him the land of Egypt for his labour wherewith he
served against it, because they wrought for me, saith the Lord GOD.

29:21 In that day will I cause the horn of the house of Israel to bud
forth, and I will give thee the opening of the mouth in the midst of
them; and they shall know that I am the LORD.

30:1 The word of the LORD came again unto me, saying, 30:2 Son of man,
prophesy and say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Howl ye, Woe worth the day!
30:3 For the day is near, even the day of the LORD is near, a cloudy
day; it shall be the time of the heathen.

30:4 And the sword shall come upon Egypt, and great pain shall be in
Ethiopia, when the slain shall fall in Egypt, and they shall take away
her multitude, and her foundations shall be broken down.

30:5 Ethiopia, and Libya, and Lydia, and all the mingled people, and
Chub, and the men of the land that is in league, shall fall with them
by the sword.

30:6 Thus saith the LORD; They also that uphold Egypt shall fall; and
the pride of her power shall come down: from the tower of Syene shall
they fall in it by the sword, saith the Lord GOD.

30:7 And they shall be desolate in the midst of the countries that are
desolate, and her cities shall be in the midst of the cities that are
wasted.

30:8 And they shall know that I am the LORD, when I have set a fire in
Egypt, and when all her helpers shall be destroyed.

30:9 In that day shall messengers go forth from me in ships to make
the careless Ethiopians afraid, and great pain shall come upon them,
as in the day of Egypt: for, lo, it cometh.

30:10 Thus saith the Lord GOD; I will also make the multitude of Egypt
to cease by the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon.

30:11 He and his people with him, the terrible of the nations, shall
be brought to destroy the land: and they shall draw their swords
against Egypt, and fill the land with the slain.

30:12 And I will make the rivers dry, and sell the land into the hand
of the wicked: and I will make the land waste, and all that is
therein, by the hand of strangers: I the LORD have spoken it.

30:13 Thus saith the Lord GOD; I will also destroy the idols, and I
will cause their images to cease out of Noph; and there shall be no
more a prince of the land of Egypt: and I will put a fear in the land
of Egypt.

30:14 And I will make Pathros desolate, and will set fire in Zoan, and
will execute judgments in No.

30:15 And I will pour my fury upon Sin, the strength of Egypt; and I
will cut off the multitude of No.

30:16 And I will set fire in Egypt: Sin shall have great pain, and No
shall be rent asunder, and Noph shall have distresses daily.

30:17 The young men of Aven and of Pibeseth shall fall by the sword:
and these cities shall go into captivity.

30:18 At Tehaphnehes also the day shall be darkened, when I shall
break there the yokes of Egypt: and the pomp of her strength shall
cease in her: as for her, a cloud shall cover her, and her daughters
shall go into captivity.

30:19 Thus will I execute judgments in Egypt: and they shall know that
I am the LORD.

30:20 And it came to pass in the eleventh year, in the first month, in
the seventh day of the month, that the word of the LORD came unto me,
saying, 30:21 Son of man, I have broken the arm of Pharaoh king of
Egypt; and, lo, it shall not be bound up to be healed, to put a roller
to bind it, to make it strong to hold the sword.

30:22 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I am against Pharaoh
king of Egypt, and will break his arms, the strong, and that which was
broken; and I will cause the sword to fall out of his hand.

30:23 And I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations, and will
disperse them through the countries.

30:24 And I will strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon, and put
my sword in his hand: but I will break Pharaoh's arms, and he shall
groan before him with the groanings of a deadly wounded man.

30:25 But I will strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon, and the
arms of Pharaoh shall fall down; and they shall know that I am the
LORD, when I shall put my sword into the hand of the king of Babylon,
and he shall stretch it out upon the land of Egypt.

30:26 And I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations, and disperse
them among the countries; and they shall know that I am the LORD.

31:1 And it came to pass in the eleventh year, in the third month, in
the first day of the month, that the word of the LORD came unto me,
saying, 31:2 Son of man, speak unto Pharaoh king of Egypt, and to his
multitude; Whom art thou like in thy greatness?  31:3 Behold, the
Assyrian was a cedar in Lebanon with fair branches, and with a
shadowing shroud, and of an high stature; and his top was among the
thick boughs.

31:4 The waters made him great, the deep set him up on high with her
rivers running round about his plants, and sent her little rivers unto
all the trees of the field.

31:5 Therefore his height was exalted above all the trees of the
field, and his boughs were multiplied, and his branches became long
because of the multitude of waters, when he shot forth.

31:6 All the fowls of heaven made their nests in his boughs, and under
his branches did all the beasts of the field bring forth their young,
and under his shadow dwelt all great nations.

31:7 Thus was he fair in his greatness, in the length of his branches:
for his root was by great waters.

31:8 The cedars in the garden of God could not hide him: the fir trees
were not like his boughs, and the chestnut trees were not like his
branches; nor any tree in the garden of God was like unto him in his
beauty.

31:9 I have made him fair by the multitude of his branches: so that
all the trees of Eden, that were in the garden of God, envied him.

31:10 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Because thou hast lifted up
thyself in height, and he hath shot up his top among the thick boughs,
and his heart is lifted up in his height; 31:11 I have therefore
delivered him into the hand of the mighty one of the heathen; he shall
surely deal with him: I have driven him out for his wickedness.

31:12 And strangers, the terrible of the nations, have cut him off,
and have left him: upon the mountains and in all the valleys his
branches are fallen, and his boughs are broken by all the rivers of
the land; and all the people of the earth are gone down from his
shadow, and have left him.

31:13 Upon his ruin shall all the fowls of the heaven remain, and all
the beasts of the field shall be upon his branches: 31:14 To the end
that none of all the trees by the waters exalt themselves for their
height, neither shoot up their top among the thick boughs, neither
their trees stand up in their height, all that drink water: for they
are all delivered unto death, to the nether parts of the earth, in the
midst of the children of men, with them that go down to the pit.

31:15 Thus saith the Lord GOD; In the day when he went down to the
grave I caused a mourning: I covered the deep for him, and I
restrained the floods thereof, and the great waters were stayed: and I
caused Lebanon to mourn for him, and all the trees of the field
fainted for him.

31:16 I made the nations to shake at the sound of his fall, when I
cast him down to hell with them that descend into the pit: and all the
trees of Eden, the choice and best of Lebanon, all that drink water,
shall be comforted in the nether parts of the earth.

31:17 They also went down into hell with him unto them that be slain
with the sword; and they that were his arm, that dwelt under his
shadow in the midst of the heathen.

31:18 To whom art thou thus like in glory and in greatness among the
trees of Eden? yet shalt thou be brought down with the trees of Eden
unto the nether parts of the earth: thou shalt lie in the midst of the
uncircumcised with them that be slain by the sword. This is Pharaoh
and all his multitude, saith the Lord GOD.

32:1 And it came to pass in the twelfth year, in the twelfth month, in
the first day of the month, that the word of the LORD came unto me,
saying, 32:2 Son of man, take up a lamentation for Pharaoh king of
Egypt, and say unto him, Thou art like a young lion of the nations,
and thou art as a whale in the seas: and thou camest forth with thy
rivers, and troubledst the waters with thy feet, and fouledst their
rivers.

32:3 Thus saith the Lord GOD; I will therefore spread out my net over
thee with a company of many people; and they shall bring thee up in my
net.

32:4 Then will I leave thee upon the land, I will cast thee forth upon
the open field, and will cause all the fowls of the heaven to remain
upon thee, and I will fill the beasts of the whole earth with thee.

32:5 And I will lay thy flesh upon the mountains, and fill the valleys
with thy height.

32:6 I will also water with thy blood the land wherein thou swimmest,
even to the mountains; and the rivers shall be full of thee.

32:7 And when I shall put thee out, I will cover the heaven, and make
the stars thereof dark; I will cover the sun with a cloud, and the
moon shall not give her light.

32:8 All the bright lights of heaven will I make dark over thee, and
set darkness upon thy land, saith the Lord GOD.

32:9 I will also vex the hearts of many people, when I shall bring thy
destruction among the nations, into the countries which thou hast not
known.

32:10 Yea, I will make many people amazed at thee, and their kings
shall be horribly afraid for thee, when I shall brandish my sword
before them; and they shall tremble at every moment, every man for his
own life, in the day of thy fall.

32:11 For thus saith the Lord GOD; The sword of the king of Babylon
shall come upon thee.

32:12 By the swords of the mighty will I cause thy multitude to fall,
the terrible of the nations, all of them: and they shall spoil the
pomp of Egypt, and all the multitude thereof shall be destroyed.

32:13 I will destroy also all the beasts thereof from beside the great
waters; neither shall the foot of man trouble them any more, nor the
hoofs of beasts trouble them.

32:14 Then will I make their waters deep, and cause their rivers to
run like oil, saith the Lord GOD.

32:15 When I shall make the land of Egypt desolate, and the country
shall be destitute of that whereof it was full, when I shall smite all
them that dwell therein, then shall they know that I am the LORD.

32:16 This is the lamentation wherewith they shall lament her: the
daughters of the nations shall lament her: they shall lament for her,
even for Egypt, and for all her multitude, saith the Lord GOD.

32:17 It came to pass also in the twelfth year, in the fifteenth day
of the month, that the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 32:18
Son of man, wail for the multitude of Egypt, and cast them down, even
her, and the daughters of the famous nations, unto the nether parts of
the earth, with them that go down into the pit.

32:19 Whom dost thou pass in beauty? go down, and be thou laid with
the uncircumcised.

32:20 They shall fall in the midst of them that are slain by the
sword: she is delivered to the sword: draw her and all her multitudes.

32:21 The strong among the mighty shall speak to him out of the midst
of hell with them that help him: they are gone down, they lie
uncircumcised, slain by the sword.

32:22 Asshur is there and all her company: his graves are about him:
all of them slain, fallen by the sword: 32:23 Whose graves are set in
the sides of the pit, and her company is round about her grave: all of
them slain, fallen by the sword, which caused terror in the land of
the living.

32:24 There is Elam and all her multitude round about her grave, all
of them slain, fallen by the sword, which are gone down uncircumcised
into the nether parts of the earth, which caused their terror in the
land of the living; yet have they borne their shame with them that go
down to the pit.

32:25 They have set her a bed in the midst of the slain with all her
multitude: her graves are round about him: all of them uncircumcised,
slain by the sword: though their terror was caused in the land of the
living, yet have they borne their shame with them that go down to the
pit: he is put in the midst of them that be slain.

32:26 There is Meshech, Tubal, and all her multitude: her graves are
round about him: all of them uncircumcised, slain by the sword, though
they caused their terror in the land of the living.

32:27 And they shall not lie with the mighty that are fallen of the
uncircumcised, which are gone down to hell with their weapons of war:
and they have laid their swords under their heads, but their
iniquities shall be upon their bones, though they were the terror of
the mighty in the land of the living.

32:28 Yea, thou shalt be broken in the midst of the uncircumcised, and
shalt lie with them that are slain with the sword.

32:29 There is Edom, her kings, and all her princes, which with their
might are laid by them that were slain by the sword: they shall lie
with the uncircumcised, and with them that go down to the pit.

32:30 There be the princes of the north, all of them, and all the
Zidonians, which are gone down with the slain; with their terror they
are ashamed of their might; and they lie uncircumcised with them that
be slain by the sword, and bear their shame with them that go down to
the pit.

32:31 Pharaoh shall see them, and shall be comforted over all his
multitude, even Pharaoh and all his army slain by the sword, saith the
Lord GOD.

32:32 For I have caused my terror in the land of the living: and he
shall be laid in the midst of the uncircumcised with them that are
slain with the sword, even Pharaoh and all his multitude, saith the
Lord GOD.

33:1 Again the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 33:2 Son of man,
speak to the children of thy people, and say unto them, When I bring
the sword upon a land, if the people of the land take a man of their
coasts, and set him for their watchman: 33:3 If when he seeth the
sword come upon the land, he blow the trumpet, and warn the people;
33:4 Then whosoever heareth the sound of the trumpet, and taketh not
warning; if the sword come, and take him away, his blood shall be upon
his own head.

33:5 He heard the sound of the trumpet, and took not warning; his
blood shall be upon him. But he that taketh warning shall deliver his
soul.

33:6 But if the watchman see the sword come, and blow not the trumpet,
and the people be not warned; if the sword come, and take any person
from among them, he is taken away in his iniquity; but his blood will
I require at the watchman's hand.

33:7 So thou, O son of man, I have set thee a watchman unto the house
of Israel; therefore thou shalt hear the word at my mouth, and warn
them from me.

33:8 When I say unto the wicked, O wicked man, thou shalt surely die;
if thou dost not speak to warn the wicked from his way, that wicked
man shall die in his iniquity; but his blood will I require at thine
hand.

33:9 Nevertheless, if thou warn the wicked of his way to turn from it;
if he do not turn from his way, he shall die in his iniquity; but thou
hast delivered thy soul.

33:10 Therefore, O thou son of man, speak unto the house of Israel;
Thus ye speak, saying, If our transgressions and our sins be upon us,
and we pine away in them, how should we then live?  33:11 Say unto
them, As I live, saith the Lord GOD, I have no pleasure in the death
of the wicked; but that the wicked turn from his way and live: turn
ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye die, O house of
Israel?  33:12 Therefore, thou son of man, say unto the children of
thy people, The righteousness of the righteous shall not deliver him
in the day of his transgression: as for the wickedness of the wicked,
he shall not fall thereby in the day that he turneth from his
wickedness; neither shall the righteous be able to live for his
righteousness in the day that he sinneth.

33:13 When I shall say to the righteous, that he shall surely live; if
he trust to his own righteousness, and commit iniquity, all his
righteousnesses shall not be remembered; but for his iniquity that he
hath committed, he shall die for it.

33:14 Again, when I say unto the wicked, Thou shalt surely die; if he
turn from his sin, and do that which is lawful and right; 33:15 If the
wicked restore the pledge, give again that he had robbed, walk in the
statutes of life, without committing iniquity; he shall surely live,
he shall not die.

33:16 None of his sins that he hath committed shall be mentioned unto
him: he hath done that which is lawful and right; he shall surely
live.

33:17 Yet the children of thy people say, The way of the Lord is not
equal: but as for them, their way is not equal.

33:18 When the righteous turneth from his righteousness, and
committeth iniquity, he shall even die thereby.

33:19 But if the wicked turn from his wickedness, and do that which is
lawful and right, he shall live thereby.

33:20 Yet ye say, The way of the Lord is not equal. O ye house of
Israel, I will judge you every one after his ways.

33:21 And it came to pass in the twelfth year of our captivity, in the
tenth month, in the fifth day of the month, that one that had escaped
out of Jerusalem came unto me, saying, The city is smitten.

33:22 Now the hand of the LORD was upon me in the evening, afore he
that was escaped came; and had opened my mouth, until he came to me in
the morning; and my mouth was opened, and I was no more dumb.

33:23 Then the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 33:24 Son of
man, they that inhabit those wastes of the land of Israel speak,
saying, Abraham was one, and he inherited the land: but we are many;
the land is given us for inheritance.

33:25 Wherefore say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Ye eat with
the blood, and lift up your eyes toward your idols, and shed blood:
and shall ye possess the land?  33:26 Ye stand upon your sword, ye
work abomination, and ye defile every one his neighbour's wife: and
shall ye possess the land?  33:27 Say thou thus unto them, Thus saith
the Lord GOD; As I live, surely they that are in the wastes shall fall
by the sword, and him that is in the open field will I give to the
beasts to be devoured, and they that be in the forts and in the caves
shall die of the pestilence.

33:28 For I will lay the land most desolate, and the pomp of her
strength shall cease; and the mountains of Israel shall be desolate,
that none shall pass through.

33:29 Then shall they know that I am the LORD, when I have laid the
land most desolate because of all their abominations which they have
committed.

33:30 Also, thou son of man, the children of thy people still are
talking against thee by the walls and in the doors of the houses, and
speak one to another, every one to his brother, saying, Come, I pray
you, and hear what is the word that cometh forth from the LORD.

33:31 And they come unto thee as the people cometh, and they sit
before thee as my people, and they hear thy words, but they will not
do them: for with their mouth they shew much love, but their heart
goeth after their covetousness.

33:32 And, lo, thou art unto them as a very lovely song of one that
hath a pleasant voice, and can play well on an instrument: for they
hear thy words, but they do them not.

33:33 And when this cometh to pass, (lo, it will come,) then shall
they know that a prophet hath been among them.

34:1 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 34:2 Son of man,
prophesy against the shepherds of Israel, prophesy, and say unto them,
Thus saith the Lord GOD unto the shepherds; Woe be to the shepherds of
Israel that do feed themselves! should not the shepherds feed the
flocks?  34:3 Ye eat the fat, and ye clothe you with the wool, ye kill
them that are fed: but ye feed not the flock.

34:4 The diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed
that which was sick, neither have ye bound up that which was broken,
neither have ye brought again that which was driven away, neither have
ye sought that which was lost; but with force and with cruelty have ye
ruled them.

34:5 And they were scattered, because there is no shepherd: and they
became meat to all the beasts of the field, when they were scattered.

34:6 My sheep wandered through all the mountains, and upon every high
hill: yea, my flock was scattered upon all the face of the earth, and
none did search or seek after them.

34:7 Therefore, ye shepherds, hear the word of the LORD; 34:8 As I
live, saith the Lord GOD, surely because my flock became a prey, and
my flock became meat to every beast of the field, because there was no
shepherd, neither did my shepherds search for my flock, but the
shepherds fed themselves, and fed not my flock; 34:9 Therefore, O ye
shepherds, hear the word of the LORD; 34:10 Thus saith the Lord GOD;
Behold, I am against the shepherds; and I will require my flock at
their hand, and cause them to cease from feeding the flock; neither
shall the shepherds feed themselves any more; for I will deliver my
flock from their mouth, that they may not be meat for them.

34:11 For thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I, even I, will both search
my sheep, and seek them out.

34:12 As a shepherd seeketh out his flock in the day that he is among
his sheep that are scattered; so will I seek out my sheep, and will
deliver them out of all places where they have been scattered in the
cloudy and dark day.

34:13 And I will bring them out from the people, and gather them from
the countries, and will bring them to their own land, and feed them
upon the mountains of Israel by the rivers, and in all the inhabited
places of the country.

34:14 I will feed them in a good pasture, and upon the high mountains
of Israel shall their fold be: there shall they lie in a good fold,
and in a fat pasture shall they feed upon the mountains of Israel.

34:15 I will feed my flock, and I will cause them to lie down, saith
the Lord GOD.

34:16 I will seek that which was lost, and bring again that which was
driven away, and will bind up that which was broken, and will
strengthen that which was sick: but I will destroy the fat and the
strong; I will feed them with judgment.

34:17 And as for you, O my flock, thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I
judge between cattle and cattle, between the rams and the he goats.

34:18 Seemeth it a small thing unto you to have eaten up the good
pasture, but ye must tread down with your feet the residue of your
pastures? and to have drunk of the deep waters, but ye must foul the
residue with your feet?  34:19 And as for my flock, they eat that
which ye have trodden with your feet; and they drink that which ye
have fouled with your feet.

34:20 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD unto them; Behold, I, even I,
will judge between the fat cattle and between the lean cattle.

34:21 Because ye have thrust with side and with shoulder, and pushed
all the diseased with your horns, till ye have scattered them abroad;
34:22 Therefore will I save my flock, and they shall no more be a
prey; and I will judge between cattle and cattle.

34:23 And I will set up one shepherd over them, and he shall feed
them, even my servant David; he shall feed them, and he shall be their
shepherd.

34:24 And I the LORD will be their God, and my servant David a prince
among them; I the LORD have spoken it.

34:25 And I will make with them a covenant of peace, and will cause
the evil beasts to cease out of the land: and they shall dwell safely
in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods.

34:26 And I will make them and the places round about my hill a
blessing; and I will cause the shower to come down in his season;
there shall be showers of blessing.

34:27 And the tree of the field shall yield her fruit, and the earth
shall yield her increase, and they shall be safe in their land, and
shall know that I am the LORD, when I have broken the bands of their
yoke, and delivered them out of the hand of those that served
themselves of them.

34:28 And they shall no more be a prey to the heathen, neither shall
the beast of the land devour them; but they shall dwell safely, and
none shall make them afraid.

34:29 And I will raise up for them a plant of renown, and they shall
be no more consumed with hunger in the land, neither bear the shame of
the heathen any more.

34:30 Thus shall they know that I the LORD their God am with them, and
that they, even the house of Israel, are my people, saith the Lord
GOD.

34:31 And ye my flock, the flock of my pasture, are men, and I am your
God, saith the Lord GOD.

35:1 Moreover the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 35:2 Son of
man, set thy face against mount Seir, and prophesy against it, 35:3
And say unto it, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, O mount Seir, I am
against thee, and I will stretch out mine hand against thee, and I
will make thee most desolate.

35:4 I will lay thy cities waste, and thou shalt be desolate, and thou
shalt know that I am the LORD.

35:5 Because thou hast had a perpetual hatred, and hast shed the blood
of the children of Israel by the force of the sword in the time of
their calamity, in the time that their iniquity had an end: 35:6
Therefore, as I live, saith the Lord GOD, I will prepare thee unto
blood, and blood shall pursue thee: sith thou hast not hated blood,
even blood shall pursue thee.

35:7 Thus will I make mount Seir most desolate, and cut off from it
him that passeth out and him that returneth.

35:8 And I will fill his mountains with his slain men: in thy hills,
and in thy valleys, and in all thy rivers, shall they fall that are
slain with the sword.

35:9 I will make thee perpetual desolations, and thy cities shall not
return: and ye shall know that I am the LORD.

35:10 Because thou hast said, These two nations and these two
countries shall be mine, and we will possess it; whereas the LORD was
there: 35:11 Therefore, as I live, saith the Lord GOD, I will even do
according to thine anger, and according to thine envy which thou hast
used out of thy hatred against them; and I will make myself known
among them, when I have judged thee.

35:12 And thou shalt know that I am the LORD, and that I have heard
all thy blasphemies which thou hast spoken against the mountains of
Israel, saying, They are laid desolate, they are given us to consume.

35:13 Thus with your mouth ye have boasted against me, and have
multiplied your words against me: I have heard them.

35:14 Thus saith the Lord GOD; When the whole earth rejoiceth, I will
make thee desolate.

35:15 As thou didst rejoice at the inheritance of the house of Israel,
because it was desolate, so will I do unto thee: thou shalt be
desolate, O mount Seir, and all Idumea, even all of it: and they shall
know that I am the LORD.

36:1 Also, thou son of man, prophesy unto the mountains of Israel, and
say, Ye mountains of Israel, hear the word of the LORD: 36:2 Thus
saith the Lord GOD; Because the enemy hath said against you, Aha, even
the ancient high places are ours in possession: 36:3 Therefore
prophesy and say, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because they have made you
desolate, and swallowed you up on every side, that ye might be a
possession unto the residue of the heathen, and ye are taken up in the
lips of talkers, and are an infamy of the people: 36:4 Therefore, ye
mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord GOD; Thus saith the
Lord GOD to the mountains, and to the hills, to the rivers, and to the
valleys, to the desolate wastes, and to the cities that are forsaken,
which became a prey and derision to the residue of the heathen that
are round about; 36:5 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Surely in the
fire of my jealousy have I spoken against the residue of the heathen,
and against all Idumea, which have appointed my land into their
possession with the joy of all their heart, with despiteful minds, to
cast it out for a prey.

36:6 Prophesy therefore concerning the land of Israel, and say unto
the mountains, and to the hills, to the rivers, and to the valleys,
Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I have spoken in my jealousy and in
my fury, because ye have borne the shame of the heathen: 36:7
Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; I have lifted up mine hand, Surely
the heathen that are about you, they shall bear their shame.

36:8 But ye, O mountains of Israel, ye shall shoot forth your
branches, and yield your fruit to my people of Israel; for they are at
hand to come.

36:9 For, behold, I am for you, and I will turn unto you, and ye shall
be tilled and sown: 36:10 And I will multiply men upon you, all the
house of Israel, even all of it: and the cities shall be inhabited,
and the wastes shall be builded: 36:11 And I will multiply upon you
man and beast; and they shall increase and bring fruit: and I will
settle you after your old estates, and will do better unto you than at
your beginnings: and ye shall know that I am the LORD.

36:12 Yea, I will cause men to walk upon you, even my people Israel;
and they shall possess thee, and thou shalt be their inheritance, and
thou shalt no more henceforth bereave them of men.

36:13 Thus saith the Lord GOD; Because they say unto you, Thou land
devourest up men, and hast bereaved thy nations: 36:14 Therefore thou
shalt devour men no more, neither bereave thy nations any more, saith
the Lord GOD.

36:15 Neither will I cause men to hear in thee the shame of the
heathen any more, neither shalt thou bear the reproach of the people
any more, neither shalt thou cause thy nations to fall any more, saith
the Lord GOD.

36:16 Moreover the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 36:17 Son of
man, when the house of Israel dwelt in their own land, they defiled it
by their own way and by their doings: their way was before me as the
uncleanness of a removed woman.

36:18 Wherefore I poured my fury upon them for the blood that they had
shed upon the land, and for their idols wherewith they had polluted
it: 36:19 And I scattered them among the heathen, and they were
dispersed through the countries: according to their way and according
to their doings I judged them.

36:20 And when they entered unto the heathen, whither they went, they
profaned my holy name, when they said to them, These are the people of
the LORD, and are gone forth out of his land.

36:21 But I had pity for mine holy name, which the house of Israel had
profaned among the heathen, whither they went.

36:22 Therefore say unto the house of Israel, thus saith the Lord GOD;
I do not this for your sakes, O house of Israel, but for mine holy
name's sake, which ye have profaned among the heathen, whither ye
went.

36:23 And I will sanctify my great name, which was profaned among the
heathen, which ye have profaned in the midst of them; and the heathen
shall know that I am the LORD, saith the Lord GOD, when I shall be
sanctified in you before their eyes.

36:24 For I will take you from among the heathen, and gather you out
of all countries, and will bring you into your own land.

36:25 Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be
clean: from all your filthiness, and from all your idols, will I
cleanse you.

36:26 A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put
within you: and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh,
and I will give you an heart of flesh.

36:27 And I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them.

36:28 And ye shall dwell in the land that I gave to your fathers; and
ye shall be my people, and I will be your God.

36:29 I will also save you from all your uncleannesses: and I will
call for the corn, and will increase it, and lay no famine upon you.

36:30 And I will multiply the fruit of the tree, and the increase of
the field, that ye shall receive no more reproach of famine among the
heathen.

36:31 Then shall ye remember your own evil ways, and your doings that
were not good, and shall lothe yourselves in your own sight for your
iniquities and for your abominations.

36:32 Not for your sakes do I this, saith the Lord GOD, be it known
unto you: be ashamed and confounded for your own ways, O house of
Israel.

36:33 Thus saith the Lord GOD; In the day that I shall have cleansed
you from all your iniquities I will also cause you to dwell in the
cities, and the wastes shall be builded.

36:34 And the desolate land shall be tilled, whereas it lay desolate
in the sight of all that passed by.

36:35 And they shall say, This land that was desolate is become like
the garden of Eden; and the waste and desolate and ruined cities are
become fenced, and are inhabited.

36:36 Then the heathen that are left round about you shall know that I
the LORD build the ruined places, and plant that that was desolate: I
the LORD have spoken it, and I will do it.

36:37 Thus saith the Lord GOD; I will yet for this be enquired of by
the house of Israel, to do it for them; I will increase them with men
like a flock.

36:38 As the holy flock, as the flock of Jerusalem in her solemn
feasts; so shall the waste cities be filled with flocks of men: and
they shall know that I am the LORD.

37:1 The hand of the LORD was upon me, and carried me out in the
spirit of the LORD, and set me down in the midst of the valley which
was full of bones, 37:2 And caused me to pass by them round about:
and, behold, there were very many in the open valley; and, lo, they
were very dry.

37:3 And he said unto me, Son of man, can these bones live? And I
answered, O Lord GOD, thou knowest.

37:4 Again he said unto me, Prophesy upon these bones, and say unto
them, O ye dry bones, hear the word of the LORD.

37:5 Thus saith the Lord GOD unto these bones; Behold, I will cause
breath to enter into you, and ye shall live: 37:6 And I will lay
sinews upon you, and will bring up flesh upon you, and cover you with
skin, and put breath in you, and ye shall live; and ye shall know that
I am the LORD.

37:7 So I prophesied as I was commanded: and as I prophesied, there
was a noise, and behold a shaking, and the bones came together, bone
to his bone.

37:8 And when I beheld, lo, the sinews and the flesh came up upon
them, and the skin covered them above: but there was no breath in
them.

37:9 Then said he unto me, Prophesy unto the wind, prophesy, son of
man, and say to the wind, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Come from the four
winds, O breath, and breathe upon these slain, that they may live.

37:10 So I prophesied as he commanded me, and the breath came into
them, and they lived, and stood up upon their feet, an exceeding great
army.

37:11 Then he said unto me, Son of man, these bones are the whole
house of Israel: behold, they say, Our bones are dried, and our hope
is lost: we are cut off for our parts.

37:12 Therefore prophesy and say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD;
Behold, O my people, I will open your graves, and cause you to come up
out of your graves, and bring you into the land of Israel.

37:13 And ye shall know that I am the LORD, when I have opened your
graves, O my people, and brought you up out of your graves, 37:14 And
shall put my spirit in you, and ye shall live, and I shall place you
in your own land: then shall ye know that I the LORD have spoken it,
and performed it, saith the LORD.

37:15 The word of the LORD came again unto me, saying, 37:16 Moreover,
thou son of man, take thee one stick, and write upon it, For Judah,
and for the children of Israel his companions: then take another
stick, and write upon it, For Joseph, the stick of Ephraim and for all
the house of Israel his companions: 37:17 And join them one to another
into one stick; and they shall become one in thine hand.

37:18 And when the children of thy people shall speak unto thee,
saying, Wilt thou not shew us what thou meanest by these?  37:19 Say
unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I will take the stick of
Joseph, which is in the hand of Ephraim, and the tribes of Israel his
fellows, and will put them with him, even with the stick of Judah, and
make them one stick, and they shall be one in mine hand.

37:20 And the sticks whereon thou writest shall be in thine hand
before their eyes.

37:21 And say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I will take
the children of Israel from among the heathen, whither they be gone,
and will gather them on every side, and bring them into their own
land: 37:22 And I will make them one nation in the land upon the
mountains of Israel; and one king shall be king to them all: and they
shall be no more two nations, neither shall they be divided into two
kingdoms any more at all.

37:23 Neither shall they defile themselves any more with their idols,
nor with their detestable things, nor with any of their
transgressions: but I will save them out of all their dwellingplaces,
wherein they have sinned, and will cleanse them: so shall they be my
people, and I will be their God.

37:24 And David my servant shall be king over them; and they all shall
have one shepherd: they shall also walk in my judgments, and observe
my statutes, and do them.

37:25 And they shall dwell in the land that I have given unto Jacob my
servant, wherein your fathers have dwelt; and they shall dwell
therein, even they, and their children, and their children's children
for ever: and my servant David shall be their prince for ever.

37:26 Moreover I will make a covenant of peace with them; it shall be
an everlasting covenant with them: and I will place them, and multiply
them, and will set my sanctuary in the midst of them for evermore.

37:27 My tabernacle also shall be with them: yea, I will be their God,
and they shall be my people.

37:28 And the heathen shall know that I the LORD do sanctify Israel,
when my sanctuary shall be in the midst of them for evermore.

38:1 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 38:2 Son of man,
set thy face against Gog, the land of Magog, the chief prince of
Meshech and Tubal, and prophesy against him, 38:3 And say, Thus saith
the Lord GOD; Behold, I am against thee, O Gog, the chief prince of
Meshech and Tubal: 38:4 And I will turn thee back, and put hooks into
thy jaws, and I will bring thee forth, and all thine army, horses and
horsemen, all of them clothed with all sorts of armour, even a great
company with bucklers and shields, all of them handling swords: 38:5
Persia, Ethiopia, and Libya with them; all of them with shield and
helmet: 38:6 Gomer, and all his bands; the house of Togarmah of the
north quarters, and all his bands: and many people with thee.

38:7 Be thou prepared, and prepare for thyself, thou, and all thy
company that are assembled unto thee, and be thou a guard unto them.

38:8 After many days thou shalt be visited: in the latter years thou
shalt come into the land that is brought back from the sword, and is
gathered out of many people, against the mountains of Israel, which
have been always waste: but it is brought forth out of the nations,
and they shall dwell safely all of them.

38:9 Thou shalt ascend and come like a storm, thou shalt be like a
cloud to cover the land, thou, and all thy bands, and many people with
thee.

38:10 Thus saith the Lord GOD; It shall also come to pass, that at the
same time shall things come into thy mind, and thou shalt think an
evil thought: 38:11 And thou shalt say, I will go up to the land of
unwalled villages; I will go to them that are at rest, that dwell
safely, all of them dwelling without walls, and having neither bars
nor gates, 38:12 To take a spoil, and to take a prey; to turn thine
hand upon the desolate places that are now inhabited, and upon the
people that are gathered out of the nations, which have gotten cattle
and goods, that dwell in the midst of the land.

38:13 Sheba, and Dedan, and the merchants of Tarshish, with all the
young lions thereof, shall say unto thee, Art thou come to take a
spoil? hast thou gathered thy company to take a prey? to carry away
silver and gold, to take away cattle and goods, to take a great spoil?
38:14 Therefore, son of man, prophesy and say unto Gog, Thus saith the
Lord GOD; In that day when my people of Israel dwelleth safely, shalt
thou not know it?  38:15 And thou shalt come from thy place out of the
north parts, thou, and many people with thee, all of them riding upon
horses, a great company, and a mighty army: 38:16 And thou shalt come
up against my people of Israel, as a cloud to cover the land; it shall
be in the latter days, and I will bring thee against my land, that the
heathen may know me, when I shall be sanctified in thee, O Gog, before
their eyes.

38:17 Thus saith the Lord GOD; Art thou he of whom I have spoken in
old time by my servants the prophets of Israel, which prophesied in
those days many years that I would bring thee against them?  38:18 And
it shall come to pass at the same time when Gog shall come against the
land of Israel, saith the Lord GOD, that my fury shall come up in my
face.

38:19 For in my jealousy and in the fire of my wrath have I spoken,
Surely in that day there shall be a great shaking in the land of
Israel; 38:20 So that the fishes of the sea, and the fowls of the
heaven, and the beasts of the field, and all creeping things that
creep upon the earth, and all the men that are upon the face of the
earth, shall shake at my presence, and the mountains shall be thrown
down, and the steep places shall fall, and every wall shall fall to
the ground.

38:21 And I will call for a sword against him throughout all my
mountains, saith the Lord GOD: every man's sword shall be against his
brother.

38:22 And I will plead against him with pestilence and with blood; and
I will rain upon him, and upon his bands, and upon the many people
that are with him, an overflowing rain, and great hailstones, fire,
and brimstone.

38:23 Thus will I magnify myself, and sanctify myself; and I will be
known in the eyes of many nations, and they shall know that I am the
LORD.

39:1 Therefore, thou son of man, prophesy against Gog, and say, Thus
saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I am against thee, O Gog, the chief prince
of Meshech and Tubal: 39:2 And I will turn thee back, and leave but
the sixth part of thee, and will cause thee to come up from the north
parts, and will bring thee upon the mountains of Israel: 39:3 And I
will smite thy bow out of thy left hand, and will cause thine arrows
to fall out of thy right hand.

39:4 Thou shalt fall upon the mountains of Israel, thou, and all thy
bands, and the people that is with thee: I will give thee unto the
ravenous birds of every sort, and to the beasts of the field to be
devoured.

39:5 Thou shalt fall upon the open field: for I have spoken it, saith
the Lord GOD.

39:6 And I will send a fire on Magog, and among them that dwell
carelessly in the isles: and they shall know that I am the LORD.

39:7 So will I make my holy name known in the midst of my people
Israel; and I will not let them pollute my holy name any more: and the
heathen shall know that I am the LORD, the Holy One in Israel.

39:8 Behold, it is come, and it is done, saith the Lord GOD; this is
the day whereof I have spoken.

39:9 And they that dwell in the cities of Israel shall go forth, and
shall set on fire and burn the weapons, both the shields and the
bucklers, the bows and the arrows, and the handstaves, and the spears,
and they shall burn them with fire seven years: 39:10 So that they
shall take no wood out of the field, neither cut down any out of the
forests; for they shall burn the weapons with fire: and they shall
spoil those that spoiled them, and rob those that robbed them, saith
the Lord GOD.

39:11 And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will give unto Gog
a place there of graves in Israel, the valley of the passengers on the
east of the sea: and it shall stop the noses of the passengers: and
there shall they bury Gog and all his multitude: and they shall call
it The valley of Hamongog.

39:12 And seven months shall the house of Israel be burying of them,
that they may cleanse the land.

39:13 Yea, all the people of the land shall bury them; and it shall be
to them a renown the day that I shall be glorified, saith the Lord
GOD.

39:14 And they shall sever out men of continual employment, passing
through the land to bury with the passengers those that remain upon
the face of the earth, to cleanse it: after the end of seven months
shall they search.

39:15 And the passengers that pass through the land, when any seeth a
man's bone, then shall he set up a sign by it, till the buriers have
buried it in the valley of Hamongog.

39:16 And also the name of the city shall be Hamonah. Thus shall they
cleanse the land.

39:17 And, thou son of man, thus saith the Lord GOD; Speak unto every
feathered fowl, and to every beast of the field, Assemble yourselves,
and come; gather yourselves on every side to my sacrifice that I do
sacrifice for you, even a great sacrifice upon the mountains of
Israel, that ye may eat flesh, and drink blood.

39:18 Ye shall eat the flesh of the mighty, and drink the blood of the
princes of the earth, of rams, of lambs, and of goats, of bullocks,
all of them fatlings of Bashan.

39:19 And ye shall eat fat till ye be full, and drink blood till ye be
drunken, of my sacrifice which I have sacrificed for you.

39:20 Thus ye shall be filled at my table with horses and chariots,
with mighty men, and with all men of war, saith the Lord GOD.

39:21 And I will set my glory among the heathen, and all the heathen
shall see my judgment that I have executed, and my hand that I have
laid upon them.

39:22 So the house of Israel shall know that I am the LORD their God
from that day and forward.

39:23 And the heathen shall know that the house of Israel went into
captivity for their iniquity: because they trespassed against me,
therefore hid I my face from them, and gave them into the hand of
their enemies: so fell they all by the sword.

39:24 According to their uncleanness and according to their
transgressions have I done unto them, and hid my face from them.

39:25 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Now will I bring again the
captivity of Jacob, and have mercy upon the whole house of Israel, and
will be jealous for my holy name; 39:26 After that they have borne
their shame, and all their trespasses whereby they have trespassed
against me, when they dwelt safely in their land, and none made them
afraid.

39:27 When I have brought them again from the people, and gathered
them out of their enemies' lands, and am sanctified in them in the
sight of many nations; 39:28 Then shall they know that I am the LORD
their God, which caused them to be led into captivity among the
heathen: but I have gathered them unto their own land, and have left
none of them any more there.

39:29 Neither will I hide my face any more from them: for I have
poured out my spirit upon the house of Israel, saith the Lord GOD.

40:1 In the five and twentieth year of our captivity, in the beginning
of the year, in the tenth day of the month, in the fourteenth year
after that the city was smitten, in the selfsame day the hand of the
LORD was upon me, and brought me thither.

40:2 In the visions of God brought he me into the land of Israel, and
set me upon a very high mountain, by which was as the frame of a city
on the south.

40:3 And he brought me thither, and, behold, there was a man, whose
appearance was like the appearance of brass, with a line of flax in
his hand, and a measuring reed; and he stood in the gate.

40:4 And the man said unto me, Son of man, behold with thine eyes, and
hear with thine ears, and set thine heart upon all that I shall shew
thee; for to the intent that I might shew them unto thee art thou
brought hither: declare all that thou seest to the house of Israel.

40:5 And behold a wall on the outside of the house round about, and in
the man's hand a measuring reed of six cubits long by the cubit and an
hand breadth: so he measured the breadth of the building, one reed;
and the height, one reed.

40:6 Then came he unto the gate which looketh toward the east, and
went up the stairs thereof, and measured the threshold of the gate,
which was one reed broad; and the other threshold of the gate, which
was one reed broad.

40:7 And every little chamber was one reed long, and one reed broad;
and between the little chambers were five cubits; and the threshold of
the gate by the porch of the gate within was one reed.

40:8 He measured also the porch of the gate within, one reed.

40:9 Then measured he the porch of the gate, eight cubits; and the
posts thereof, two cubits; and the porch of the gate was inward.

40:10 And the little chambers of the gate eastward were three on this
side, and three on that side; they three were of one measure: and the
posts had one measure on this side and on that side.

40:11 And he measured the breadth of the entry of the gate, ten
cubits; and the length of the gate, thirteen cubits.

40:12 The space also before the little chambers was one cubit on this
side, and the space was one cubit on that side: and the little
chambers were six cubits on this side, and six cubits on that side.

40:13 He measured then the gate from the roof of one little chamber to
the roof of another: the breadth was five and twenty cubits, door
against door.

40:14 He made also posts of threescore cubits, even unto the post of
the court round about the gate.

40:15 And from the face of the gate of the entrance unto the face of
the porch of the inner gate were fifty cubits.

40:16 And there were narrow windows to the little chambers, and to
their posts within the gate round about, and likewise to the arches:
and windows were round about inward: and upon each post were palm
trees.

40:17 Then brought he me into the outward court, and, lo, there were
chambers, and a pavement made for the court round about: thirty
chambers were upon the pavement.

40:18 And the pavement by the side of the gates over against the
length of the gates was the lower pavement.

40:19 Then he measured the breadth from the forefront of the lower
gate unto the forefront of the inner court without, an hundred cubits
eastward and northward.

40:20 And the gate of the outward court that looked toward the north,
he measured the length thereof, and the breadth thereof.

40:21 And the little chambers thereof were three on this side and
three on that side; and the posts thereof and the arches thereof were
after the measure of the first gate: the length thereof was fifty
cubits, and the breadth five and twenty cubits.

40:22 And their windows, and their arches, and their palm trees, were
after the measure of the gate that looketh toward the east; and they
went up unto it by seven steps; and the arches thereof were before
them.

40:23 And the gate of the inner court was over against the gate toward
the north, and toward the east; and he measured from gate to gate an
hundred cubits.

40:24 After that he brought me toward the south, and behold a gate
toward the south: and he measured the posts thereof and the arches
thereof according to these measures.

40:25 And there were windows in it and in the arches thereof round
about, like those windows: the length was fifty cubits, and the
breadth five and twenty cubits.

40:26 And there were seven steps to go up to it, and the arches
thereof were before them: and it had palm trees, one on this side, and
another on that side, upon the posts thereof.

40:27 And there was a gate in the inner court toward the south: and he
measured from gate to gate toward the south an hundred cubits.

40:28 And he brought me to the inner court by the south gate: and he
measured the south gate according to these measures; 40:29 And the
little chambers thereof, and the posts thereof, and the arches
thereof, according to these measures: and there were windows in it and
in the arches thereof round about: it was fifty cubits long, and five
and twenty cubits broad.

40:30 And the arches round about were five and twenty cubits long, and
five cubits broad.

40:31 And the arches thereof were toward the utter court; and palm
trees were upon the posts thereof: and the going up to it had eight
steps.

40:32 And he brought me into the inner court toward the east: and he
measured the gate according to these measures.

40:33 And the little chambers thereof, and the posts thereof, and the
arches thereof, were according to these measures: and there were
windows therein and in the arches thereof round about: it was fifty
cubits long, and five and twenty cubits broad.

40:34 And the arches thereof were toward the outward court; and palm
trees were upon the posts thereof, on this side, and on that side: and
the going up to it had eight steps.

40:35 And he brought me to the north gate, and measured it according
to these measures; 40:36 The little chambers thereof, the posts
thereof, and the arches thereof, and the windows to it round about:
the length was fifty cubits, and the breadth five and twenty cubits.

40:37 And the posts thereof were toward the utter court; and palm
trees were upon the posts thereof, on this side, and on that side: and
the going up to it had eight steps.

40:38 And the chambers and the entries thereof were by the posts of
the gates, where they washed the burnt offering.

40:39 And in the porch of the gate were two tables on this side, and
two tables on that side, to slay thereon the burnt offering and the
sin offering and the trespass offering.

40:40 And at the side without, as one goeth up to the entry of the
north gate, were two tables; and on the other side, which was at the
porch of the gate, were two tables.

40:41 Four tables were on this side, and four tables on that side, by
the side of the gate; eight tables, whereupon they slew their
sacrifices.

40:42 And the four tables were of hewn stone for the burnt offering,
of a cubit and an half long, and a cubit and an half broad, and one
cubit high: whereupon also they laid the instruments wherewith they
slew the burnt offering and the sacrifice.

40:43 And within were hooks, an hand broad, fastened round about: and
upon the tables was the flesh of the offering.

40:44 And without the inner gate were the chambers of the singers in
the inner court, which was at the side of the north gate; and their
prospect was toward the south: one at the side of the east gate having
the prospect toward the north.

40:45 And he said unto me, This chamber, whose prospect is toward the
south, is for the priests, the keepers of the charge of the house.

40:46 And the chamber whose prospect is toward the north is for the
priests, the keepers of the charge of the altar: these are the sons of
Zadok among the sons of Levi, which come near to the LORD to minister
unto him.

40:47 So he measured the court, an hundred cubits long, and an hundred
cubits broad, foursquare; and the altar that was before the house.

40:48 And he brought me to the porch of the house, and measured each
post of the porch, five cubits on this side, and five cubits on that
side: and the breadth of the gate was three cubits on this side, and
three cubits on that side.

40:49 The length of the porch was twenty cubits, and the breadth
eleven cubits, and he brought me by the steps whereby they went up to
it: and there were pillars by the posts, one on this side, and another
on that side.

41:1 Afterward he brought me to the temple, and measured the posts,
six cubits broad on the one side, and six cubits broad on the other
side, which was the breadth of the tabernacle.

41:2 And the breadth of the door was ten cubits; and the sides of the
door were five cubits on the one side, and five cubits on the other
side: and he measured the length thereof, forty cubits: and the
breadth, twenty cubits.

41:3 Then went he inward, and measured the post of the door, two
cubits; and the door, six cubits; and the breadth of the door, seven
cubits.

41:4 So he measured the length thereof, twenty cubits; and the
breadth, twenty cubits, before the temple: and he said unto me, This
is the most holy place.

41:5 After he measured the wall of the house, six cubits; and the
breadth of every side chamber, four cubits, round about the house on
every side.

41:6 And the side chambers were three, one over another, and thirty in
order; and they entered into the wall which was of the house for the
side chambers round about, that they might have hold, but they had not
hold in the wall of the house.

41:7 And there was an enlarging, and a winding about still upward to
the side chambers: for the winding about of the house went still
upward round about the house: therefore the breadth of the house was
still upward, and so increased from the lowest chamber to the highest
by the midst.

41:8 I saw also the height of the house round about: the foundations
of the side chambers were a full reed of six great cubits.

41:9 The thickness of the wall, which was for the side chamber
without, was five cubits: and that which was left was the place of the
side chambers that were within.

41:10 And between the chambers was the wideness of twenty cubits round
about the house on every side.

41:11 And the doors of the side chambers were toward the place that
was left, one door toward the north, and another door toward the
south: and the breadth of the place that was left was five cubits
round about.

41:12 Now the building that was before the separate place at the end
toward the west was seventy cubits broad; and the wall of the building
was five cubits thick round about, and the length thereof ninety
cubits.

41:13 So he measured the house, an hundred cubits long; and the
separate place, and the building, with the walls thereof, an hundred
cubits long; 41:14 Also the breadth of the face of the house, and of
the separate place toward the east, an hundred cubits.

41:15 And he measured the length of the building over against the
separate place which was behind it, and the galleries thereof on the
one side and on the other side, an hundred cubits, with the inner
temple, and the porches of the court; 41:16 The door posts, and the
narrow windows, and the galleries round about on their three stories,
over against the door, cieled with wood round about, and from the
ground up to the windows, and the windows were covered; 41:17 To that
above the door, even unto the inner house, and without, and by all the
wall round about within and without, by measure.

41:18 And it was made with cherubims and palm trees, so that a palm
tree was between a cherub and a cherub; and every cherub had two
faces; 41:19 So that the face of a man was toward the palm tree on the
one side, and the face of a young lion toward the palm tree on the
other side: it was made through all the house round about.

41:20 From the ground unto above the door were cherubims and palm
trees made, and on the wall of the temple.

41:21 The posts of the temple were squared, and the face of the
sanctuary; the appearance of the one as the appearance of the other.

41:22 The altar of wood was three cubits high, and the length thereof
two cubits; and the corners thereof, and the length thereof, and the
walls thereof, were of wood: and he said unto me, This is the table
that is before the LORD.

41:23 And the temple and the sanctuary had two doors.

41:24 And the doors had two leaves apiece, two turning leaves; two
leaves for the one door, and two leaves for the other door.

41:25 And there were made on them, on the doors of the temple,
cherubims and palm trees, like as were made upon the walls; and there
were thick planks upon the face of the porch without.

41:26 And there were narrow windows and palm trees on the one side and
on the other side, on the sides of the porch, and upon the side
chambers of the house, and thick planks.

42:1 Then he brought me forth into the utter court, the way toward the
north: and he brought me into the chamber that was over against the
separate place, and which was before the building toward the north.

42:2 Before the length of an hundred cubits was the north door, and
the breadth was fifty cubits.

42:3 Over against the twenty cubits which were for the inner court,
and over against the pavement which was for the utter court, was
gallery against gallery in three stories.

42:4 And before the chambers was a walk to ten cubits breadth inward,
a way of one cubit; and their doors toward the north.

42:5 Now the upper chambers were shorter: for the galleries were
higher than these, than the lower, and than the middlemost of the
building.

42:6 For they were in three stories, but had not pillars as the
pillars of the courts: therefore the building was straitened more than
the lowest and the middlemost from the ground.

42:7 And the wall that was without over against the chambers, toward
the utter court on the forepart of the chambers, the length thereof
was fifty cubits.

42:8 For the length of the chambers that were in the utter court was
fifty cubits: and, lo, before the temple were an hundred cubits.

42:9 And from under these chambers was the entry on the east side, as
one goeth into them from the utter court.

42:10 The chambers were in the thickness of the wall of the court
toward the east, over against the separate place, and over against the
building.

42:11 And the way before them was like the appearance of the chambers
which were toward the north, as long as they, and as broad as they:
and all their goings out were both according to their fashions, and
according to their doors.

42:12 And according to the doors of the chambers that were toward the
south was a door in the head of the way, even the way directly before
the wall toward the east, as one entereth into them.

42:13 Then said he unto me, The north chambers and the south chambers,
which are before the separate place, they be holy chambers, where the
priests that approach unto the LORD shall eat the most holy things:
there shall they lay the most holy things, and the meat offering, and
the sin offering, and the trespass offering; for the place is holy.

42:14 When the priests enter therein, then shall they not go out of
the holy place into the utter court, but there they shall lay their
garments wherein they minister; for they are holy; and shall put on
other garments, and shall approach to those things which are for the
people.

42:15 Now when he had made an end of measuring the inner house, he
brought me forth toward the gate whose prospect is toward the east,
and measured it round about.

42:16 He measured the east side with the measuring reed, five hundred
reeds, with the measuring reed round about.

42:17 He measured the north side, five hundred reeds, with the
measuring reed round about.

42:18 He measured the south side, five hundred reeds, with the
measuring reed.

42:19 He turned about to the west side, and measured five hundred
reeds with the measuring reed.

42:20 He measured it by the four sides: it had a wall round about,
five hundred reeds long, and five hundred broad, to make a separation
between the sanctuary and the profane place.

43:1 Afterward he brought me to the gate, even the gate that looketh
toward the east: 43:2 And, behold, the glory of the God of Israel came
from the way of the east: and his voice was like a noise of many
waters: and the earth shined with his glory.

43:3 And it was according to the appearance of the vision which I saw,
even according to the vision that I saw when I came to destroy the
city: and the visions were like the vision that I saw by the river
Chebar; and I fell upon my face.

43:4 And the glory of the LORD came into the house by the way of the
gate whose prospect is toward the east.

43:5 So the spirit took me up, and brought me into the inner court;
and, behold, the glory of the LORD filled the house.

43:6 And I heard him speaking unto me out of the house; and the man
stood by me.

43:7 And he said unto me, Son of man, the place of my throne, and the
place of the soles of my feet, where I will dwell in the midst of the
children of Israel for ever, and my holy name, shall the house of
Israel no more defile, neither they, nor their kings, by their
whoredom, nor by the carcases of their kings in their high places.

43:8 In their setting of their threshold by my thresholds, and their
post by my posts, and the wall between me and them, they have even
defiled my holy name by their abominations that they have committed:
wherefore I have consumed them in mine anger.

43:9 Now let them put away their whoredom, and the carcases of their
kings, far from me, and I will dwell in the midst of them for ever.

43:10 Thou son of man, shew the house to the house of Israel, that
they may be ashamed of their iniquities: and let them measure the
pattern.

43:11 And if they be ashamed of all that they have done, shew them the
form of the house, and the fashion thereof, and the goings out
thereof, and the comings in thereof, and all the forms thereof, and
all the ordinances thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the
laws thereof: and write it in their sight, that they may keep the
whole form thereof, and all the ordinances thereof, and do them.

43:12 This is the law of the house; Upon the top of the mountain the
whole limit thereof round about shall be most holy. Behold, this is
the law of the house.

43:13 And these are the measures of the altar after the cubits: The
cubit is a cubit and an hand breadth; even the bottom shall be a
cubit, and the breadth a cubit, and the border thereof by the edge
thereof round about shall be a span: and this shall be the higher
place of the altar.

43:14 And from the bottom upon the ground even to the lower settle
shall be two cubits, and the breadth one cubit; and from the lesser
settle even to the greater settle shall be four cubits, and the
breadth one cubit.

43:15 So the altar shall be four cubits; and from the altar and upward
shall be four horns.

43:16 And the altar shall be twelve cubits long, twelve broad, square
in the four squares thereof.

43:17 And the settle shall be fourteen cubits long and fourteen broad
in the four squares thereof; and the border about it shall be half a
cubit; and the bottom thereof shall be a cubit about; and his stairs
shall look toward the east.

43:18 And he said unto me, Son of man, thus saith the Lord GOD; These
are the ordinances of the altar in the day when they shall make it, to
offer burnt offerings thereon, and to sprinkle blood thereon.

43:19 And thou shalt give to the priests the Levites that be of the
seed of Zadok, which approach unto me, to minister unto me, saith the
Lord GOD, a young bullock for a sin offering.

43:20 And thou shalt take of the blood thereof, and put it on the four
horns of it, and on the four corners of the settle, and upon the
border round about: thus shalt thou cleanse and purge it.

43:21 Thou shalt take the bullock also of the sin offering, and he
shall burn it in the appointed place of the house, without the
sanctuary.

43:22 And on the second day thou shalt offer a kid of the goats
without blemish for a sin offering; and they shall cleanse the altar,
as they did cleanse it with the bullock.

43:23 When thou hast made an end of cleansing it, thou shalt offer a
young bullock without blemish, and a ram out of the flock without
blemish.

43:24 And thou shalt offer them before the LORD, and the priests shall
cast salt upon them, and they shall offer them up for a burnt offering
unto the LORD.

43:25 Seven days shalt thou prepare every day a goat for a sin
offering: they shall also prepare a young bullock, and a ram out of
the flock, without blemish.

43:26 Seven days shall they purge the altar and purify it; and they
shall consecrate themselves.

43:27 And when these days are expired, it shall be, that upon the
eighth day, and so forward, the priests shall make your burnt
offerings upon the altar, and your peace offerings; and I will accept
you, saith the Lord GOD.

44:1 Then he brought me back the way of the gate of the outward
sanctuary which looketh toward the east; and it was shut.

44:2 Then said the LORD unto me; This gate shall be shut, it shall not
be opened, and no man shall enter in by it; because the LORD, the God
of Israel, hath entered in by it, therefore it shall be shut.

44:3 It is for the prince; the prince, he shall sit in it to eat bread
before the LORD; he shall enter by the way of the porch of that gate,
and shall go out by the way of the same.

44:4 Then brought he me the way of the north gate before the house:
and I looked, and, behold, the glory of the LORD filled the house of
the LORD: and I fell upon my face.

44:5 And the LORD said unto me, Son of man, mark well, and behold with
thine eyes, and hear with thine ears all that I say unto thee
concerning all the ordinances of the house of the LORD, and all the
laws thereof; and mark well the entering in of the house, with every
going forth of the sanctuary.

44:6 And thou shalt say to the rebellious, even to the house of
Israel, Thus saith the Lord GOD; O ye house of Israel, let it suffice
you of all your abominations, 44:7 In that ye have brought into my
sanctuary strangers, uncircumcised in heart, and uncircumcised in
flesh, to be in my sanctuary, to pollute it, even my house, when ye
offer my bread, the fat and the blood, and they have broken my
covenant because of all your abominations.

44:8 And ye have not kept the charge of mine holy things: but ye have
set keepers of my charge in my sanctuary for yourselves.

44:9 Thus saith the Lord GOD; No stranger, uncircumcised in heart, nor
uncircumcised in flesh, shall enter into my sanctuary, of any stranger
that is among the children of Israel.

44:10 And the Levites that are gone away far from me, when Israel went
astray, which went astray away from me after their idols; they shall
even bear their iniquity.

44:11 Yet they shall be ministers in my sanctuary, having charge at
the gates of the house, and ministering to the house: they shall slay
the burnt offering and the sacrifice for the people, and they shall
stand before them to minister unto them.

44:12 Because they ministered unto them before their idols, and caused
the house of Israel to fall into iniquity; therefore have I lifted up
mine hand against them, saith the Lord GOD, and they shall bear their
iniquity.

44:13 And they shall not come near unto me, to do the office of a
priest unto me, nor to come near to any of my holy things, in the most
holy place: but they shall bear their shame, and their abominations
which they have committed.

44:14 But I will make them keepers of the charge of the house, for all
the service thereof, and for all that shall be done therein.

44:15 But the priests the Levites, the sons of Zadok, that kept the
charge of my sanctuary when the children of Israel went astray from
me, they shall come near to me to minister unto me, and they shall
stand before me to offer unto me the fat and the blood, saith the Lord
GOD: 44:16 They shall enter into my sanctuary, and they shall come
near to my table, to minister unto me, and they shall keep my charge.

44:17 And it shall come to pass, that when they enter in at the gates
of the inner court, they shall be clothed with linen garments; and no
wool shall come upon them, whiles they minister in the gates of the
inner court, and within.

44:18 They shall have linen bonnets upon their heads, and shall have
linen breeches upon their loins; they shall not gird themselves with
any thing that causeth sweat.

44:19 And when they go forth into the utter court, even into the utter
court to the people, they shall put off their garments wherein they
ministered, and lay them in the holy chambers, and they shall put on
other garments; and they shall not sanctify the people with their
garments.

44:20 Neither shall they shave their heads, nor suffer their locks to
grow long; they shall only poll their heads.

44:21 Neither shall any priest drink wine, when they enter into the
inner court.

44:22 Neither shall they take for their wives a widow, nor her that is
put away: but they shall take maidens of the seed of the house of
Israel, or a widow that had a priest before.

44:23 And they shall teach my people the difference between the holy
and profane, and cause them to discern between the unclean and the
clean.

44:24 And in controversy they shall stand in judgment; and they shall
judge it according to my judgments: and they shall keep my laws and my
statutes in all mine assemblies; and they shall hallow my sabbaths.

44:25 And they shall come at no dead person to defile themselves: but
for father, or for mother, or for son, or for daughter, for brother,
or for sister that hath had no husband, they may defile themselves.

44:26 And after he is cleansed, they shall reckon unto him seven days.

44:27 And in the day that he goeth into the sanctuary, unto the inner
court, to minister in the sanctuary, he shall offer his sin offering,
saith the Lord GOD.

44:28 And it shall be unto them for an inheritance: I am their
inheritance: and ye shall give them no possession in Israel: I am
their possession.

44:29 They shall eat the meat offering, and the sin offering, and the
trespass offering: and every dedicated thing in Israel shall be
theirs.

44:30 And the first of all the firstfruits of all things, and every
oblation of all, of every sort of your oblations, shall be the
priest's: ye shall also give unto the priest the first of your dough,
that he may cause the blessing to rest in thine house.

44:31 The priests shall not eat of any thing that is dead of itself,
or torn, whether it be fowl or beast.

45:1 Moreover, when ye shall divide by lot the land for inheritance,
ye shall offer an oblation unto the LORD, an holy portion of the land:
the length shall be the length of five and twenty thousand reeds, and
the breadth shall be ten thousand. This shall be holy in all the
borders thereof round about.

45:2 Of this there shall be for the sanctuary five hundred in length,
with five hundred in breadth, square round about; and fifty cubits
round about for the suburbs thereof.

45:3 And of this measure shalt thou measure the length of five and
twenty thousand, and the breadth of ten thousand: and in it shall be
the sanctuary and the most holy place.

45:4 The holy portion of the land shall be for the priests the
ministers of the sanctuary, which shall come near to minister unto the
LORD: and it shall be a place for their houses, and an holy place for
the sanctuary.

45:5 And the five and twenty thousand of length, and the ten thousand
of breadth shall also the Levites, the ministers of the house, have
for themselves, for a possession for twenty chambers.

45:6 And ye shall appoint the possession of the city five thousand
broad, and five and twenty thousand long, over against the oblation of
the holy portion: it shall be for the whole house of Israel.

45:7 And a portion shall be for the prince on the one side and on the
other side of the oblation of the holy portion, and of the possession
of the city, before the oblation of the holy portion, and before the
possession of the city, from the west side westward, and from the east
side eastward: and the length shall be over against one of the
portions, from the west border unto the east border.

45:8 In the land shall be his possession in Israel: and my princes
shall no more oppress my people; and the rest of the land shall they
give to the house of Israel according to their tribes.

45:9 Thus saith the Lord GOD; Let it suffice you, O princes of Israel:
remove violence and spoil, and execute judgment and justice, take away
your exactions from my people, saith the Lord GOD.

45:10 Ye shall have just balances, and a just ephah, and a just bath.

45:11 The ephah and the bath shall be of one measure, that the bath
may contain the tenth part of an homer, and the ephah the tenth part
of an homer: the measure thereof shall be after the homer.

45:12 And the shekel shall be twenty gerahs: twenty shekels, five and
twenty shekels, fifteen shekels, shall be your maneh.

45:13 This is the oblation that ye shall offer; the sixth part of an
ephah of an homer of wheat, and ye shall give the sixth part of an
ephah of an homer of barley: 45:14 Concerning the ordinance of oil,
the bath of oil, ye shall offer the tenth part of a bath out of the
cor, which is an homer of ten baths; for ten baths are an homer: 45:15
And one lamb out of the flock, out of two hundred, out of the fat
pastures of Israel; for a meat offering, and for a burnt offering, and
for peace offerings, to make reconciliation for them, saith the Lord
GOD.

45:16 All the people of the land shall give this oblation for the
prince in Israel.

45:17 And it shall be the prince's part to give burnt offerings, and
meat offerings, and drink offerings, in the feasts, and in the new
moons, and in the sabbaths, in all solemnities of the house of Israel:
he shall prepare the sin offering, and the meat offering, and the
burnt offering, and the peace offerings, to make reconciliation for
the house of Israel.

45:18 Thus saith the Lord GOD; In the first month, in the first day of
the month, thou shalt take a young bullock without blemish, and
cleanse the sanctuary: 45:19 And the priest shall take of the blood of
the sin offering, and put it upon the posts of the house, and upon the
four corners of the settle of the altar, and upon the posts of the
gate of the inner court.

45:20 And so thou shalt do the seventh day of the month for every one
that erreth, and for him that is simple: so shall ye reconcile the
house.

45:21 In the first month, in the fourteenth day of the month, ye shall
have the passover, a feast of seven days; unleavened bread shall be
eaten.

45:22 And upon that day shall the prince prepare for himself and for
all the people of the land a bullock for a sin offering.

45:23 And seven days of the feast he shall prepare a burnt offering to
the LORD, seven bullocks and seven rams without blemish daily the
seven days; and a kid of the goats daily for a sin offering.

45:24 And he shall prepare a meat offering of an ephah for a bullock,
and an ephah for a ram, and an hin of oil for an ephah.

45:25 In the seventh month, in the fifteenth day of the month, shall
he do the like in the feast of the seven days, according to the sin
offering, according to the burnt offering, and according to the meat
offering, and according to the oil.

46:1 Thus saith the Lord GOD; The gate of the inner court that looketh
toward the east shall be shut the six working days; but on the sabbath
it shall be opened, and in the day of the new moon it shall be opened.

46:2 And the prince shall enter by the way of the porch of that gate
without, and shall stand by the post of the gate, and the priests
shall prepare his burnt offering and his peace offerings, and he shall
worship at the threshold of the gate: then he shall go forth; but the
gate shall not be shut until the evening.

46:3 Likewise the people of the land shall worship at the door of this
gate before the LORD in the sabbaths and in the new moons.

46:4 And the burnt offering that the prince shall offer unto the LORD
in the sabbath day shall be six lambs without blemish, and a ram
without blemish.

46:5 And the meat offering shall be an ephah for a ram, and the meat
offering for the lambs as he shall be able to give, and an hin of oil
to an ephah.

46:6 And in the day of the new moon it shall be a young bullock
without blemish, and six lambs, and a ram: they shall be without
blemish.

46:7 And he shall prepare a meat offering, an ephah for a bullock, and
an ephah for a ram, and for the lambs according as his hand shall
attain unto, and an hin of oil to an ephah.

46:8 And when the prince shall enter, he shall go in by the way of the
porch of that gate, and he shall go forth by the way thereof.

46:9 But when the people of the land shall come before the LORD in the
solemn feasts, he that entereth in by the way of the north gate to
worship shall go out by the way of the south gate; and he that
entereth by the way of the south gate shall go forth by the way of the
north gate: he shall not return by the way of the gate whereby he came
in, but shall go forth over against it.

46:10 And the prince in the midst of them, when they go in, shall go
in; and when they go forth, shall go forth.

46:11 And in the feasts and in the solemnities the meat offering shall
be an ephah to a bullock, and an ephah to a ram, and to the lambs as
he is able to give, and an hin of oil to an ephah.

46:12 Now when the prince shall prepare a voluntary burnt offering or
peace offerings voluntarily unto the LORD, one shall then open him the
gate that looketh toward the east, and he shall prepare his burnt
offering and his peace offerings, as he did on the sabbath day: then
he shall go forth; and after his going forth one shall shut the gate.

46:13 Thou shalt daily prepare a burnt offering unto the LORD of a
lamb of the first year without blemish: thou shalt prepare it every
morning.

46:14 And thou shalt prepare a meat offering for it every morning, the
sixth part of an ephah, and the third part of an hin of oil, to temper
with the fine flour; a meat offering continually by a perpetual
ordinance unto the LORD.

46:15 Thus shall they prepare the lamb, and the meat offering, and the
oil, every morning for a continual burnt offering.

46:16 Thus saith the Lord GOD; If the prince give a gift unto any of
his sons, the inheritance thereof shall be his sons'; it shall be
their possession by inheritance.

46:17 But if he give a gift of his inheritance to one of his servants,
then it shall be his to the year of liberty; after it shall return to
the prince: but his inheritance shall be his sons' for them.

46:18 Moreover the prince shall not take of the people's inheritance
by oppression, to thrust them out of their possession; but he shall
give his sons inheritance out of his own possession: that my people be
not scattered every man from his possession.

46:19 After he brought me through the entry, which was at the side of
the gate, into the holy chambers of the priests, which looked toward
the north: and, behold, there was a place on the two sides westward.

46:20 Then said he unto me, This is the place where the priests shall
boil the trespass offering and the sin offering, where they shall bake
the meat offering; that they bear them not out into the utter court,
to sanctify the people.

46:21 Then he brought me forth into the utter court, and caused me to
pass by the four corners of the court; and, behold, in every corner of
the court there was a court.

46:22 In the four corners of the court there were courts joined of
forty cubits long and thirty broad: these four corners were of one
measure.

46:23 And there was a row of building round about in them, round about
them four, and it was made with boiling places under the rows round
about.

46:24 Then said he unto me, These are the places of them that boil,
where the ministers of the house shall boil the sacrifice of the
people.

47:1 Afterward he brought me again unto the door of the house; and,
behold, waters issued out from under the threshold of the house
eastward: for the forefront of the house stood toward the east, and
the waters came down from under from the right side of the house, at
the south side of the altar.

47:2 Then brought he me out of the way of the gate northward, and led
me about the way without unto the utter gate by the way that looketh
eastward; and, behold, there ran out waters on the right side.

47:3 And when the man that had the line in his hand went forth
eastward, he measured a thousand cubits, and he brought me through the
waters; the waters were to the ankles.

47:4 Again he measured a thousand, and brought me through the waters;
the waters were to the knees. Again he measured a thousand, and
brought me through; the waters were to the loins.

47:5 Afterward he measured a thousand; and it was a river that I could
not pass over: for the waters were risen, waters to swim in, a river
that could not be passed over.

47:6 And he said unto me, Son of man, hast thou seen this? Then he
brought me, and caused me to return to the brink of the river.

47:7 Now when I had returned, behold, at the bank of the river were
very many trees on the one side and on the other.

47:8 Then said he unto me, These waters issue out toward the east
country, and go down into the desert, and go into the sea: which being
brought forth into the sea, the waters shall be healed.

47:9 And it shall come to pass, that every thing that liveth, which
moveth, whithersoever the rivers shall come, shall live: and there
shall be a very great multitude of fish, because these waters shall
come thither: for they shall be healed; and every thing shall live
whither the river cometh.

47:10 And it shall come to pass, that the fishers shall stand upon it
from Engedi even unto Eneglaim; they shall be a place to spread forth
nets; their fish shall be according to their kinds, as the fish of the
great sea, exceeding many.

47:11 But the miry places thereof and the marishes thereof shall not
be healed; they shall be given to salt.

47:12 And by the river upon the bank thereof, on this side and on that
side, shall grow all trees for meat, whose leaf shall not fade,
neither shall the fruit thereof be consumed: it shall bring forth new
fruit according to his months, because their waters they issued out of
the sanctuary: and the fruit thereof shall be for meat, and the leaf
thereof for medicine.

47:13 Thus saith the Lord GOD; This shall be the border, whereby ye
shall inherit the land according to the twelve tribes of Israel:
Joseph shall have two portions.

47:14 And ye shall inherit it, one as well as another: concerning the
which I lifted up mine hand to give it unto your fathers: and this
land shall fall unto you for inheritance.

47:15 And this shall be the border of the land toward the north side,
from the great sea, the way of Hethlon, as men go to Zedad; 47:16
Hamath, Berothah, Sibraim, which is between the border of Damascus and
the border of Hamath; Hazarhatticon, which is by the coast of Hauran.

47:17 And the border from the sea shall be Hazarenan, the border of
Damascus, and the north northward, and the border of Hamath. And this
is the north side.

47:18 And the east side ye shall measure from Hauran, and from
Damascus, and from Gilead, and from the land of Israel by Jordan, from
the border unto the east sea. And this is the east side.

47:19 And the south side southward, from Tamar even to the waters of
strife in Kadesh, the river to the great sea. And this is the south
side southward.

47:20 The west side also shall be the great sea from the border, till
a man come over against Hamath. This is the west side.

47:21 So shall ye divide this land unto you according to the tribes of
Israel.

47:22 And it shall come to pass, that ye shall divide it by lot for an
inheritance unto you, and to the strangers that sojourn among you,
which shall beget children among you: and they shall be unto you as
born in the country among the children of Israel; they shall have
inheritance with you among the tribes of Israel.

47:23 And it shall come to pass, that in what tribe the stranger
sojourneth, there shall ye give him his inheritance, saith the Lord
GOD.

48:1 Now these are the names of the tribes. From the north end to the
coast of the way of Hethlon, as one goeth to Hamath, Hazarenan, the
border of Damascus northward, to the coast of Hamath; for these are
his sides east and west; a portion for Dan.

48:2 And by the border of Dan, from the east side unto the west side,
a portion for Asher.

48:3 And by the border of Asher, from the east side even unto the west
side, a portion for Naphtali.

48:4 And by the border of Naphtali, from the east side unto the west
side, a portion for Manasseh.

48:5 And by the border of Manasseh, from the east side unto the west
side, a portion for Ephraim.

48:6 And by the border of Ephraim, from the east side even unto the
west side, a portion for Reuben.

48:7 And by the border of Reuben, from the east side unto the west
side, a portion for Judah.

48:8 And by the border of Judah, from the east side unto the west
side, shall be the offering which ye shall offer of five and twenty
thousand reeds in breadth, and in length as one of the other parts,
from the east side unto the west side: and the sanctuary shall be in
the midst of it.

48:9 The oblation that ye shall offer unto the LORD shall be of five
and twenty thousand in length, and of ten thousand in breadth.

48:10 And for them, even for the priests, shall be this holy oblation;
toward the north five and twenty thousand in length, and toward the
west ten thousand in breadth, and toward the east ten thousand in
breadth, and toward the south five and twenty thousand in length: and
the sanctuary of the LORD shall be in the midst thereof.

48:11 It shall be for the priests that are sanctified of the sons of
Zadok; which have kept my charge, which went not astray when the
children of Israel went astray, as the Levites went astray.

48:12 And this oblation of the land that is offered shall be unto them
a thing most holy by the border of the Levites.

48:13 And over against the border of the priests the Levites shall
have five and twenty thousand in length, and ten thousand in breadth:
all the length shall be five and twenty thousand, and the breadth ten
thousand.

48:14 And they shall not sell of it, neither exchange, nor alienate
the firstfruits of the land: for it is holy unto the LORD.

48:15 And the five thousand, that are left in the breadth over against
the five and twenty thousand, shall be a profane place for the city,
for dwelling, and for suburbs: and the city shall be in the midst
thereof.

48:16 And these shall be the measures thereof; the north side four
thousand and five hundred, and the south side four thousand and five
hundred, and on the east side four thousand and five hundred, and the
west side four thousand and five hundred.

48:17 And the suburbs of the city shall be toward the north two
hundred and fifty, and toward the south two hundred and fifty, and
toward the east two hundred and fifty, and toward the west two hundred
and fifty.

48:18 And the residue in length over against the oblation of the holy
portion shall be ten thousand eastward, and ten thousand westward: and
it shall be over against the oblation of the holy portion; and the
increase thereof shall be for food unto them that serve the city.

48:19 And they that serve the city shall serve it out of all the
tribes of Israel.

48:20 All the oblation shall be five and twenty thousand by five and
twenty thousand: ye shall offer the holy oblation foursquare, with the
possession of the city.

48:21 And the residue shall be for the prince, on the one side and on
the other of the holy oblation, and of the possession of the city,
over against the five and twenty thousand of the oblation toward the
east border, and westward over against the five and twenty thousand
toward the west border, over against the portions for the prince: and
it shall be the holy oblation; and the sanctuary of the house shall be
in the midst thereof.

48:22 Moreover from the possession of the Levites, and from the
possession of the city, being in the midst of that which is the
prince's, between the border of Judah and the border of Benjamin,
shall be for the prince.

48:23 As for the rest of the tribes, from the east side unto the west
side, Benjamin shall have a portion.

48:24 And by the border of Benjamin, from the east side unto the west
side, Simeon shall have a portion.

48:25 And by the border of Simeon, from the east side unto the west
side, Issachar a portion.

48:26 And by the border of Issachar, from the east side unto the west
side, Zebulun a portion.

48:27 And by the border of Zebulun, from the east side unto the west
side, Gad a portion.

48:28 And by the border of Gad, at the south side southward, the
border shall be even from Tamar unto the waters of strife in Kadesh,
and to the river toward the great sea.

48:29 This is the land which ye shall divide by lot unto the tribes of
Israel for inheritance, and these are their portions, saith the Lord
GOD.

48:30 And these are the goings out of the city on the north side, four
thousand and five hundred measures.

48:31 And the gates of the city shall be after the names of the tribes
of Israel: three gates northward; one gate of Reuben, one gate of
Judah, one gate of Levi.

48:32 And at the east side four thousand and five hundred: and three
